Beaumont, TX (CNN) –  Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, questions whether global warming is real, arguing that the "data are not supporting what the advocates are arguing.""The last 15 years, there has been no recorded warming. Contrary to all the theories that – that they are expounding, there should have been warming over the last 15 years.  It hasn't happened," said Cruz.Follow @politicaltickerCruz spoke to CNN in an exclusive interview following an event here to promote his new energy plan, which he says he will formally introduce in the Senate next week.When pressed about the fact that the arctic is melting, and whether that helps prove climate change is real, Cruz dismissed it."Other parts are going up.  It is not - you know, you always have to be worried about something that is considered a so-called scientific theory that fits every scenario. Climate change, as they have defined it, can never be disproved, because whether it gets hotter or whether it gets colder, whatever happens, they'll say, well, it's changing, so it proves our theory," argued Cruz."I am always troubled by a theory that fits every perfect situation.  You know, back in the '70s - I remember the '70s, we were told there was global cooling.  And everyone was told global cooling was a really big problem.  And then that faded. And then we were told by Al Gore and others there was global warming and that was going to be a big problem. And then it morphed.  It wasn't global warming anymore, it became climate change.  And the problem with climate change is there's never been a day in the history of the world in which the climate is not changing," said Cruz.Secretary of State John Kerry recently made waves by declaring climate change is "perhaps - perhaps the world's most fearsome weapon of mass destruction."Not surprisingly, Cruz disagreed."Well, you know, it is ironic that Secretary Kerry would say that, uh, given that he is, right now, in the process of negotiating with the nation of Iran in - in what Israel's prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has called an historically bad deal," said Cruz."It is ironic that he sees a greater threat from your SUV in your driveway than he does from the nation of Iran, with their radical Islamic jihad and - and their stated desire to obliterate, to annihilate Israel.  He sees a greater threat from your SUV than he does to Iranian nuclear weapons," Cruz said of Kerry.Cruz chose the Spindle Top Boomtown Museum here, where oil discovery sparked the Texas oil boom more than a century ago, to push his ideas to support what he calls a "great American energy renaissance."His proposal includes many traditional GOP ideas – more oil drilling and expanding energy exploration and repealing many EPA regulations he calls harmful.Missing from his official plan are other forms of energy, what Republicans call "all of the above," but he told CNN he does support alternative energy, as long as it comes from the private sector, not the federal government."We ought to be allowing the private sector to pursue every form of energy because the energy of the future, it's not going to come from the government picking winners and losers," Cruz told CNN."We ought to open up energy innovation across the board and - and remove the barriers to every form of energy."Is he kidding? 97% of scientists agree that climate change is real. It is not controversial, it is fact.The tobacco industry spent decades trotting out "doctors" and "scientists" to deny the overwhelming consensus of legitimate research that showed that cigarets are addictive and harmful........
......a handful of fools believed them....and the industry used this doubt to delay the inevitable as long as possible.....
.....today, industry and their ailed political groups are using the same technique to deny the reality of climate change.....
......the scientific consensus regarding smoking was right.........as is the consensus regrading Man Made Climate Change......
.....the only question is how long will industry be able to dupe the fools....and delay the inevitable this time....How many things can a  person be wrong about?Another idiot that tries to argue against global warming because it is cold.  Global warming doesnt mean it gets hotter, it is about melting ice changing weather patterns.  Does he want to also argue that weather hasn't become more unpredictable or that snow in Texas and Georgia is normal? Or more frequent storms, stronger hurricanes, etc.  idiot"We ought to open up energy innovation across the board and – and remove the barriers to every form of energy."And kiss our planet goodbye.How many science classes has he taken?  has he spent his adult life studying disciplines like climatology, meteorology, geology, etc?  if not, he needs to educate himself before mouthing off with such stupidity. stupid people think if they don't know something, no one does. smart people realize they don't know everything about everything and respect others' knowledge. mr cruz proves every day which kind of person he is. the epitaph for the human species will be 'they went extinct because republicans thought it was too expensive to save it.' marsha blackburn demonstrated perfectly what's wrong with the republican party the other day on meet the press. they see everything thru the prism of the almighty dollar. this will be our undoing.Cruz talks about the global cooling talk in the 70s – neglecting to mention that magazines like Time and Newsweek had articles, which were NOT based on scientific evidence.Cruz relies on the lazy, low-information GOP base to further his cause. All he really wants to do is exploit our nation's natural resources with impunity so he and his buddies can get rich.Cruz is willing to bet YOUR life on it.It's so hard to believe an educated man such as Ted Cruz who went to Princeton and Harvard can be so insanely closed minded and lame . It is as if he still believes the world is flat . Is it his belief that God will show up with a broom and take care of those that believe in evolution and cause and effect.."Ted is on my health care plan," Heidi Nelson Cruz, a Houston-based managing director for Wall Street firm Goldman Sachs,I guess Cruz wen't up to the Article Sea and measured the WATER ( not ice) temperature his self!Not supported by data? What about creationism? It's not supported by data, and it's recognized by the smaller intelligentsia among us. What about fictional novels being used to support ideology in the economic theater? No data supports "Atlas Shrugged". but the republican party tries it's damn-dist to apply it to daily governance. The amount of stupidity and hypocrisy in the republican ranks is getting out of hand. I'll bet there's data to prove this theory.Pretty warm in areas that did not freeze due to the polar vortex.  Australia, Sochi, New Zealand, California, Alaska, and more.Cruz spouting Fox Fables' "facts" how droll.Since when did Cruz become an expert?  Where is he getting his information?  If it is from an industry sponsored group, then it isn't a surprise that they call climate change a lie.  I wonder why would we risk it when doing nothing is a lot more dangerous.WOW what a lousy interview letting him" off the hook so many times because the interviewer was less prepared than he is on the subject of "CLIMATE CHANGE"
WE ALL KNOW THAT global cooling and global warming were incorrect statements of the problem.
Global warming: take a look at the polar ice cap and Antartica both with huge shrinking ice = oceanic waters cooling and rising
Then translate that into effects on the gulf stream warm water current to Europe rain record snows and flooding ( el nino in the pacific) the results record Storms typhoons more Tornados across the globe and in US.
What is changing is our "climate" that's not debatable.
The cause maybe debatable, but for me Co2 emissions are the major cause that has to be addressed.
climate change = cooling or getting warmer is a fascile debate as both have negative impacts on crop yields to feed the worlds growing population, never mind the associated health risks excess carbon emissions represent.
Regards,
Hodgson.this guy is a dangerous idiot. I guess the only nonfiction he has read was the DR. Suess book he used during his filibuster.He is all ego. And leads a bunch of sheep tea-partiers who have no education. Please Texas, please – succeed from the union.Man made global warming is actually still just a theory. There is lots of evidence that supports it but it still does not prove it is true. There are too many variables. And we have only been able to accurately measure climate changes over the last few decades. These kinds of changes we see now may have been going on long before we were able to see them. As far as we know, the earths climate may be self correcting.  Only time will tell. Those who believe it is true are guilty of catastrophic thinking and suffer from great anxiety  and many are using it as a political partisan tool to try and frighten people into voting for them. If it is true, those who believe it is so are not doing a very good job at convincing  us with their finger pointing and poisonous political rhetoric. We are all in this together and we must address it without political infighting."Global warming not supported by data"Cruz is right.And the Arctic ice cap grew by 29 percent last year.with so much hot air coming out of Canadian Cruz, ofcourse the globe is warmingRafeal Cruz can't even use his real name. The Guns Over People tea potty bigots would go nuts.GO BACK TO CANADA!!!  The only thing harmful is you from the state of TX and deregulation.
I hope Bill Maher's fighting gerrymandering redistricting is this guy's district.
We need to pack his bags and send him back to his country of birth.
It's NOT global warming you moron!  The little messiah and his crazy pastor daddy just don't get it.Like said a couple of days ago.   Terminology was changed so no matter what happened, the argument could continue.  For people who didn't read the whole article, notice that he does mention using alternative energy sources, just not having the government picking who they will financially support.Weather forecast