7.3kBy
Ted ThornhillPublished:
  
  
      08:12 EST, 27 February 2014
    
  

 | 
Updated:
  
  
      10:00 EST, 27 February 2014594View  commentsThere is no scientific proof of man-made global warming and a hotter earth would be ‘beneficial for humans and the majority of other species’, according to a founding member of environmental campaign group Greenpeace.The assertion was made by Canadian ecologist Patrick Moore, a member of Greenpeace from 1971 to 1986, to U.S senators on Tuesday.He told The Senate Environment and Public Works Committee: ‘There is no scientific proof that human emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) are the dominant cause of the minor warming of the Earth’s atmosphere over the past 100 years. If there were such a proof it would be written down for all to see. No actual proof, as it is understood in science, exists.’Heated debate: Patrick Moore, pictured here giving a speech in Montreal, has claimed that there's no scientific evidence for man-made global warmingMoore pointed out that there was an Ice Age 450million years ago when CO2 was 10 times higher. 

More...


         Could giant walls protect the Midwest from TORNADOES? Barriers would thwart storm threat forever, claims physicist

         Geoengineering could have 'catastrophic consequences': Schemes to control climate change could backfire, warn scientistsHe said: ‘There is some correlation, but little evidence, to support a direct causal relationship between CO2 and global temperature through the millennia. The fact that we had both higher temperatures and an ice age at a time when CO2 emissions were 10 times higher than they are today fundamentally contradicts the certainty that human-caused CO2 emissions are the main cause of global warming.’Even if the earth does warm up, Moore claims that it will be to the advantage of humans and other forms of life, as ‘humans are a tropical species’.Patrick Moore pictured talking about nuclear power in Augusta, Georgia, in 2011 in Mayor Copenhaver's officeHot topic: Moore claims that a warmer Earth will actually be beneficial for humans as we're a tropical species (pictured is a Nasa thermal satellite image showing the world's arctic surface temperature trends during autumn between 1981 and 2008)'There is no scientific proof that human emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) are the dominant cause of the minor warming of the Earth’s atmosphere over the past 100 years. If there were such a proof it would be written down for all to see. No actual proof, as it is understood in science, exists.'The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) states: “It is extremely likely that human influence has been the dominant cause of the observed warming since the mid-20th century.” (My emphasis)“Extremely likely” is not a scientific term but rather a judgment, as in a court of law. The IPCC defines “extremely likely” as a “95-100% probability”.'But upon further examination it is clear that these numbers are not the result of any mathematical calculation or statistical analysis. They have been “invented” as a construct within the IPCC report to express “expert judgment”, as determined by the IPCC contributors.'When modern life evolved over 500 million years ago, CO2 was more than 10 times higher than today, yet life flourished at this time. Then an Ice Age occurred 450 million years ago when CO2 was 10 times higherthan today.'There is some correlation, but little evidence, to support a direct causal relationship between CO2 and global temperature through the millennia. The fact that we had both higher temperatures and an ice age at a time when CO2 emissions were 10 times higher than they are today fundamentally contradicts the certainty that human-caused CO2 emissions are the main cause of global warming.'Today, we live in an unusually cold period in the history of life on earth and there is no reason to believe that a warmer climate would be anything but beneficial for humans and the majority of other species. There is ample reason to believe that a sharp cooling of the climate would bring disastrous results for human civilization.'The IPCC states that humans are the dominant cause of warming “since the mid-20th century”, which is 1950. From 1910 to 1940 there was an increase in global average temperature of 0.5C over that 30-year period. Then there was a 30-year “pause” until 1970.'This was followed by an increase of 0.57C during the 30-year period from 1970 to 2000. Since then there has been no increase, perhaps a slight decrease, in average global temperature. This in itself tends to negate the validity of the computer models, as CO2 emissions have continued to accelerate during this time.'The increase in temperature between 1910-1940 was virtually identical to the increase between 1970-2000. Yet the IPCC does not attribute the increase from 1910-1940 to “human influence.”'He said: ‘It is extremely likely that a warmer temperature than today’s would be far better than a cooler one.’Humans, he added, just aren’t capable of predicting global temperature changes.Moore said that he left Greenpeace because it ‘took a sharp turn to the political left’.Dr Doug Parr, Chief Scientist at Greenpeace UK, told MailOnline: 'On climate science, Greenpeace accepts the consensus view put forward by 97 per cent of climate scientists, every national and international scientific institute and every government in the world – climate change is happening, it’s caused mainly by human activity, and it’s highly dangerous for the future well-being of people on this planet.'Moore has made several other assertions over the years that have been at odds with Greenpeace's views. He has advocated logging, claiming it actually causes reforestation, and attacked campaigners for fear-mongering over nuclear energy.His latest comments came as two of the world’s leading scientific organisations warned that man-made global warming is worsening and will disrupt both the natural world and human society.The U.S. National Academy of Sciences and the Royal Society, which is the national scientific academy of the United Kingdom, are releasing an unusual plain language report on climate change that addressed 20 issues in a question-and-answer format.‘People do have persistent questions all about climate change,’ said study author Ben Santer of the Lawrence Livermore National Lab in California. ‘This is a one-stop shop for many of those questions.’The report, released on Thursday, addresses new issues such as the recent slowing in the increase of world temperatures and how heat-trapping gases are connected to extreme weather. Increases in extreme weather, melting glaciers, rising seas and oceans getting more acidic are already happening, the 36-page report said.And those changes ‘are expected to increase greater warming and will threaten food production, freshwater supplies, coastal infrastructure and especially the welfare of the huge population currently living in low-lying areas,’ the report said.The report said that while the rate of warming is slower in the 2000s than it was in the 1990s it doesn't negate the 150 years of observations that show the world is warming. The report also says that more the 90 percent of the heat trapped by greenhouse gases lately has been absorbed into the oceans' deep water, which for a while slows surface warming but not the long-term trend. There is enough evidence on the science to warrant action, Sir Paul Nurse, president of the Royal Society, said in a news release.‘We've changed the chemical composition of the atmosphere; that's not a belief system. We know that beyond a shadow of a doubt,’ Santer said in an interview. ‘We ignore this at our peril.’Share what you thinkThe comments below have not been moderated.Adamangeloe,
            
            
                London, United Kingdom,
            
            1 month agoIt's not a question of belief. It's science. Practically every scientific institute and every climate scientist says this.jeffreyeg,
            
            
                Belle Mead, United States,
            
            1 month agoForget weathermen and climatologists, if you really want to understand climate over the 5 billion year history of the earth, the geologists will tell you that the earth has on its own been going through periods of extreme hot to extreme cold, and all without man.  To think that increasing the CO2 in the atmosphere from some infinitesimally small amount to another slightly higher infinitesimally small amount  smacks of the ideology that existed when Galileo proved that the sun does not rotate around the earth.Jim Vanderhoek,
            
            
                Port Colborne, Canada,
            
            1 month agoThis man is not an expert on climate. His got his Ph.D in ecology way back in the 60s,  before climate change (global warming) was well understood.  98% of climate experts disagree with him. He says that Global Warming is a money making scheme, but who is paying his bills? He is a mouthpiece for lumber, nuclear, and oil industries.qwerty,
            
            
                Glasgow,
            
            1 month agoCold snowy winters are due to weather. Milder wet winters are caused by climate change. Apparently. The climatologists told us so it must be true.Beto Sabio,
            
            
                Ft Lauderdale, United States,
            
            1 month agoIn 1920 there were One Billion 700 million people on Earth, and only 20,000 automobiles.

Today there are 7 Billion 150 Million people on Earth and Millions of autos.

It is Ridiculous to Believe that 6 Billion more People burning fossil fuels for electricity and heating, consuming manufactured goods and Millions of autos and trucks exhaust....
" Have .Had No Effect" on Carbon in Atmosphere !abinico warez,
            
            
                mendocino,
            
            1 month agoYeah, and I bet he also now thinks bitcon (a.k.a. bitcoin) is real money.Adamangeloe,
            
            
                London, United Kingdom,
            
            1 month agoEr. No. Climate change doesn't just refer to warming. It refers to the acidification of the oceans etc.2 of 4 repliesSee all repliesc.traven,
            
            
                edinburgh, United Kingdom,
            
            1 month agoMr Farmer----------I see you didn't take your usual opportunity for a wind farm plug on your favourite "online comic", which you spend rather a lot of time reading. As it happens I am a big science fan, but computer models of the climate don't actually tell you much about climate They only tell you a much about models. Putting a bunch of junk into a computer and getting a bunch of junk out is not science. Computers don't  KNOW anything  ------On your other point about insurance you will find that it's not the changing climate that companies are worried about, but rather the fact that more and more people and buildings are in the way of climate. eg. all the way up the eastern seaboard of the US. When more people and buildings are in the way of hurricanes----- guess what?----- You get more damage to buildings and people.Moonie,
            
            
                Vancouver British Columbia, Canada,
            
            1 month agoI live by the pacific ocean and I can tell you that the acidification of the ocean in my part of the world is happening. We see it mostly in the starfish community that are literally turning to goo and the clams and oysters are in no better shape. I don't know who and what to blame but when you live close to nature you see there is an ill wind (for us humans) blowing. When I'm in the city, I don't see it, but once back in  natures world I see it and it is a bit alarming to say the least.Adamangeloe,
            
            
                London, United Kingdom,
            
            1 month agoCheck out the institute he's talking for. It's a right wing think tank funded by Exxonmobil who have a vested interest in rubbishing climate change. Just saying.Moonie,
            
            
                Vancouver British Columbia, Canada,
            
            1 month agoTrue, he is no longer an activist but a well paid by the oily machinery that keeps our world churning.Quinn,
            
            
                New York,
            
            1 month agoThat's right, we had to change the name from "Global Warming" because everyone was freezing their butts off and no one was buying it.Charles,
            
            
                Melbourne,
            
            1 month agoAs a scientist what concerns me is that anytime someone speaks out against man made climate change, they are treated as a heretic. Climate change has become a religon.2 of 3 repliesSee all repliesRon,
            
            
                Carlisle,
            
            1 month agoIts actually a bit like the religion versus atheism argument but in reverse. Scientists who propose the existence of climate change are trying to prove their case whereas those who deny its existence semm to be relyning on blind faith.Ron,
            
            
                Carlisle,
            
            1 month agoApologies fro 'fat fingers'The views expressed in the contents above are those of our users and do not necessarily reflect the views of MailOnline.We are no longer accepting comments on this article.The life and death of the real 'Lil Snoop': Meet the teenage queen of Chicago's gangland who grew up in a 'warzone' and 'turned to killing to avenge the murder of her little brother'Copy link to paste in your messagePublished by Associated Newspapers LtdPart of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday & Metro Media Group