(Before It's News) 
By Deborah Dupré
 
States of emergencies declared due to a tornado outbreak in a 10-state region are likely just the beginning of what’s to come for 2014, meteorologists and climatologists say, most of whom blame global warming and its deniers, while others caution that weather modification and weather warfare, such as through HAARP, are the culprits.
 
“It seems that every year for the past several years, the tornadoes have been more frequent and have caused more deaths and damage than ever before,” reports Web Pro News “Tornadoes are even occurring in states that seldom see any tornado activity, prompting many to wonder what on earth is going on with the weather system.”
 
The multi-state storm system that began Friday has claimed at least 20 lives and destroyed hundreds of homes in the southern United States. Friday, tornadoes struck four North Carolina counties with 150 mph winds ripping through the state Friday, destroying some 200 homes. Governor Pat McCrory declared a state of emergency and warned residents about more severe weather was in the forecast. 
 
Most of the twister deaths occurred Sunday when tornadoes hit Arkansas, Iowa, Kansas, and Oklahoma. At least 100 people in Arkansas have sustained injuries and ten died. Arkansas Governor Mike Beebe said at least 15 people died in that state from the storm that authorities say produced the first fatalities of this year’s tornado season. He’d previously announced 16 deaths, but recanted that count. Mississippi is under a state of emergency. Monday, a tornado hit Tupelo, killing at least one person was killed.
 
“Some say it is directly related to global warming while others say it’s simply the changing weather patterns,” reports Kimberly Ripley for Web Pro News. “Either way it’s a frightening phenomenon and it’s heartbreaking to know that people will lose their homes–and some will even lose their lives–before the 2014 season comes to a close.”
 
“Simply weather patterns” changing is hardly a scientific explanation, according to scientists, some growing more concerned knowing weather is a result of climate change. Some scientists have grown angry at global warming deniers, blaming them for today’s death and destruction by neglecting to address global warming and the violent storms predicted due to it.

 
Some say atypical super storms are due to weather manipulation, such as HAARP is known to contribute. The U.S. Congress has approved weather modification applications in the nation. In 2011, when a deadly tornado outbreak rocked Arkansas, Little Rock Chief Meteorologist for KARK 4 noted ”odd formations” during the special tornado warnings program a week before the killer storms hit. 
 
The metorologist Francis repeated several times during a special TV program on the extreme storms that he’d never seen such strangely forming tornadoes. Viewers saw him particularly animated that night when the map clearly indicated a tornado had formed on the east side of one of the many storms, rather on the typical west side in the direction it was moving. 
 
“This is really atypical, isn’t it?” Francis asked his colleague on the show. (Expert: 10s of 1000s Dixieland evacuees possible, Dupré, D., Examiner.com, April 22, 2009)

 
“Environmental modification techniques” refers to any technique for changing – through the deliberate manipulation of natural processes – the dynamics, composition or structure of the Earth, including its biota, lithosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere, or of outer space. (Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental Modification Techniques, United Nations, Geneva: 18 May 1977)
 
“Environmental warfare” is the intentional modification or manipulation of the natural ecology, such as climate and weather, earth systems such as the ionosphere, magnetosphere, tectonic plate system, and/or the triggering of seismic events (earthquakes) to cause intentional physical, economic, and psycho-social, and physical destruction to an intended target geophysical or population location, as part of strategic or tactical war.” (Eco News)
 
Could the increasing super storms be a combination of both global warming and environmental manipultation/warfare? It is possible that, for geopolitical gain, nefarious entities could use the predicted crisis of global warming storms, triggering them and enhancing them with weather modification. Qui bono? With enough homes lost in oil and gas-rich areas, the fossil fuel industry would have greater access if those areas became sacrifice zones.

Are super storms really increasing?
 
Deadly and destructive thunderstorms — and the violent tornadoes they produce — are forecast to see a “robust” increase across parts of the U.S. in upcoming decades due to climate change, according to a first-of-its-kind study published in 2013 in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, as reported by USA Today.
 
“Scientists have been predicting this,” commented Dr. Paul Brown, author of Notes From A Dying Planet under a Dupré article about the horrific tornado destuction in Arkansas. Global warming deniers and the fossil fuel companies should pay for this, for the sacrifice zones they created, and for a transition to renewable energy.”   
                                                                                                                          
“Springtime severe thunderstorms could increase by as much as 40% over the eastern U.S. (roughly from the Rockies to the Atlantic) by the end of the century, says lead author of the 2013 study report Noah Diffenbaugh of Stanford University. 
 
USA Today said that study was ”one of the first that found such a link between climate change and severe storms. Most previous research had been inconclusive, perfect ammo for climate change deniers to attack “wacko treehuggers,” other greenies, “socialist lefties,” mature researchers and anyone else astute in the fields of climate and related fossil fuel human/environmental destruction.

“In recent years, severe storms and tornadoes have produced more destruction than any other weather phenomena and are typically one of the main causes of catastrophic losses in the U.S. Of the 11 weather disasters in 2012 that led to at least $1 billion in damages, seven were caused by severe thunderstorms and tornadoes.” (USA Today)
 
Tornadoes and severe thunderstorms are the extreme weather phenomena least understood with respect to climate change, according to Weather Underground meteorologist Jeff Masters. What is known, however, is that two primary conditions are required to produce severe thunderstorms: 1) Fuel for these monster storms to develop — what scientists call “convective available potential energy” (CAPE), created as air in the lower atmosphere warms: The warm air rises, carrying with it moisture to higher altitudes. 2) Vertical wind shear, a strong current of wind that helps spin energy and moisture in the atmosphere.
 
Numerous previous studies found that, while CAPE might increase due to global warming, wind shear might decrease, so the two conditions neutralize each other. In the 2013 study, however, “we’re seeing that global warming produces more days with high CAPE and sufficient shear to form severe thunderstorms,” Diffenbaugh said. The net effect? More days overall with both high CAPE and high shear.
 
Diffenbaugh’s study co-authors, Martin Scherer of Stanford and Robert Trapp of Purdue University, and their research team used a group of complex climate computer models to research how the atmosphere will react to global warming. 
 
As for specific locations, some of the most significant spring increases in thunderstorms were predicted for Oklahoma, Texas and Louisiana. The study also predicted increased storm days in winter and fall. For the entire year, the researchers forecast an increase in severe storms of 25 to 30% – and that could mean at least 25 to 30% more homes and lives lost.
 
“Sadly, we have many examples of cases where a single storm has had disastrous impact,” Diffenbaugh says. “So a 25 or 30 percent increase in the annual occurrence represents a substantial increase in the overall risk.”
 
“This study is fairly robust,” says Kevin Trenberth, senior scientist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo., who was not part of the study. “The prospect is worrying, with the increases in severe thunderstorms and the risk of large-scale environments that favor tornadoes having the potential for major impacts in the U.S.”  
 
“It’s an intriguing result,” agreed Harold Brooks, a scientist with the National Severe Storms Laboratory in Norman, Okla. – but nobody mentioned weather manipulation/warfare in relation to the study, nor have such scientists since then reported on the military’s poissble or probable role in today’s weather and possible subsequent death destruction. Why not?
 
The real result is pain and suffering of thousands of people over the past few days and that of scientists combating a sophisticated oil and gas industry-supported climate change denial movement.

When climate scientists were accused of massaging data in 2009, cable news networks pounced on the “Climategate” story, offering a slew of talking heads to declare global warming a hoax. In 2010, an independent study, funded in part by none other than the Koch brothers—confirmed that climate change is very real.
 
Physicist Richard Muller, formerly a leading global warming skeptic, led the project and declared “global warming is real” in a Wall Street Journal op-ed: “Climategate was a huge story. I bet debunking Climategate is going to be huger!” Turning to cable news coverage, however, he found the networks had devoted a total of 24 seconds to the story—and infinitely more time to the return of the McRib.
 
Simply put, global warming deniers lobby against constraint of human/fossil fuel industry-caused CO2.
 
“That is bad science, and worse ethics,” says Ron Scholl, in response to an April 11 letter by climate change denier Patrick Moore.
 
It is even worse science and ethics to deny the existence of weather warfare.By Deborah DupréStates of emergencies declared due to a tornado outbreak in a 10-state region are likely just the beginning of what’s to come for 2014, meteorologists and climatologists say, most of whom blame global warming and its deniers, while others caution that weather modification and weather warfare, such as through HAARP, are the culprits.“It seems that every year for the past several years, the tornadoes have been more frequent and have caused more deaths and damage than ever before,” reports Web Pro News “Tornadoes are even occurring in states that seldom see any tornado activity, prompting many to wonder what on earth is going on with the weather system.”The multi-state storm system that began Friday has claimed at least 20 lives and destroyed hundreds of homes in the southern United States. Friday, tornadoes struck four North Carolina counties with 150 mph winds ripping through the state Friday, destroying some 200 homes. Governor Pat McCrory declared a state of emergency and warned residents about more severe weather was in the forecast.Most of the twister deaths occurred Sunday when tornadoes hit Arkansas, Iowa, Kansas, and Oklahoma. At least 100 people in Arkansas have sustained injuries and ten died. Arkansas Governor Mike Beebe said at least 15 people died in that state from the storm that authorities say produced the first fatalities of this year’s tornado season. He’d previously announced 16 deaths, but recanted that count. Mississippi is under a state of emergency. Monday, a tornado hit Tupelo, killing at least one person was killed.“Some say it is directly related to global warming while others say it’s simply the changing weather patterns,” reports Kimberly Ripley for Web Pro News. “Either way it’s a frightening phenomenon and it’s heartbreaking to know that people will lose their homes–and some will even lose their lives–before the 2014 season comes to a close.”“Simply weather patterns” changing is hardly a scientific explanation, according to scientists, some growing more concerned knowing weather is a result of climate change. Some scientists have grown angry at global warming deniers, blaming them for today’s death and destruction by neglecting to address global warming and the violent storms predicted due to it.Some say atypical super storms are due to weather manipulation, such as HAARP is known to contribute. The U.S. Congress has approved weather modification applications in the nation. In 2011, when a deadly tornado outbreak rocked Arkansas, Little Rock Chief Meteorologist for KARK 4 noted ”odd formations” during the special tornado warnings program a week before the killer storms hit.The metorologist Francis repeated several times during a special TV program on the extreme storms that he’d never seen such strangely forming tornadoes. Viewers saw him particularly animated that night when the map clearly indicated a tornado had formed on the east side of one of the many storms, rather on the typical west side in the direction it was moving.“This is really atypical, isn’t it?” Francis asked his colleague on the show. (Expert: 10s of 1000s Dixieland evacuees possible, Dupré, D., Examiner.com, April 22, 2009)“Environmental modification techniques” refers to any technique for changing – through the deliberate manipulation of natural processes – the dynamics, composition or structure of the Earth, including its biota, lithosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere, or of outer space. (Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental Modification Techniques, United Nations, Geneva: 18 May 1977)“Environmental warfare” is the intentional modification or manipulation of the natural ecology, such as climate and weather, earth systems such as the ionosphere, magnetosphere, tectonic plate system, and/or the triggering of seismic events (earthquakes) to cause intentional physical, economic, and psycho-social, and physical destruction to an intended target geophysical or population location, as part of strategic or tactical war.” (Eco News)Could the increasing super storms be a combination of both global warming and environmental manipultation/warfare? It is possible that, for geopolitical gain, nefarious entities could use the predicted crisis of global warming storms, triggering them and enhancing them with weather modification. Qui bono? With enough homes lost in oil and gas-rich areas, the fossil fuel industry would have greater access if those areas became sacrifice zones.Are super storms really increasing?Deadly and destructive thunderstorms — and the violent tornadoes they produce — are forecast to see a “robust” increase across parts of the U.S. in upcoming decades due to climate change, according to a first-of-its-kind study published in 2013 in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, as reported by USA Today.“Scientists have been predicting this,” commented Dr. Paul Brown, author of Notes From A Dying Planet under a Dupré article about the horrific tornado destuction in Arkansas. Global warming deniers and the fossil fuel companies should pay for this, for the sacrifice zones they created, and for a transition to renewable energy.”“Springtime severe thunderstorms could increase by as much as 40% over the eastern U.S. (roughly from the Rockies to the Atlantic) by the end of the century, says lead author of the 2013 study report Noah Diffenbaugh of Stanford University.USA Today said that study was ”one of the first that found such a link between climate change and severe storms. Most previous research had been inconclusive, perfect ammo for climate change deniers to attack “wacko treehuggers,” other greenies, “socialist lefties,” mature researchers and anyone else astute in the fields of climate and related fossil fuel human/environmental destruction.“In recent years, severe storms and tornadoes have produced more destruction than any other weather phenomena and are typically one of the main causes of catastrophic losses in the U.S. Of the 11 weather disasters in 2012 that led to at least $1 billion in damages, seven were caused by severe thunderstorms and tornadoes.” (USA Today)Tornadoes and severe thunderstorms are the extreme weather phenomena least understood with respect to climate change, according to Weather Underground meteorologist Jeff Masters. What is known, however, is that two primary conditions are required to produce severe thunderstorms: 1) Fuel for these monster storms to develop — what scientists call “convective available potential energy” (CAPE), created as air in the lower atmosphere warms: The warm air rises, carrying with it moisture to higher altitudes. 2) Vertical wind shear, a strong current of wind that helps spin energy and moisture in the atmosphere.Numerous previous studies found that, while CAPE might increase due to global warming, wind shear might decrease, so the two conditions neutralize each other. In the 2013 study, however, “we’re seeing that global warming produces more days with high CAPE and sufficient shear to form severe thunderstorms,” Diffenbaugh said. The net effect? More days overall with both high CAPE and high shear.Diffenbaugh’s study co-authors, Martin Scherer of Stanford and Robert Trapp of Purdue University, and their research team used a group of complex climate computer models to research how the atmosphere will react to global warming.As for specific locations, some of the most significant spring increases in thunderstorms were predicted for Oklahoma, Texas and Louisiana. The study also predicted increased storm days in winter and fall. For the entire year, the researchers forecast an increase in severe storms of 25 to 30% – and that could mean at least 25 to 30% more homes and lives lost.“Sadly, we have many examples of cases where a single storm has had disastrous impact,” Diffenbaugh says. “So a 25 or 30 percent increase in the annual occurrence represents a substantial increase in the overall risk.”“This study is fairly robust,” says Kevin Trenberth, senior scientist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo., who was not part of the study. “The prospect is worrying, with the increases in severe thunderstorms and the risk of large-scale environments that favor tornadoes having the potential for major impacts in the U.S.”“It’s an intriguing result,” agreed Harold Brooks, a scientist with the National Severe Storms Laboratory in Norman, Okla. – but nobody mentioned weather manipulation/warfare in relation to the study, nor have such scientists since then reported on the military’s poissble or probable role in today’s weather and possible subsequent death destruction. Why not?The real result is pain and suffering of thousands of people over the past few days and that of scientists combating a sophisticated oil and gas industry-supported climate change denial movement.When climate scientists were accused of massaging data in 2009, cable news networks pounced on the “Climategate” story, offering a slew of talking heads to declare global warming a hoax. In 2010, an independent study, funded in part by none other than the Koch brothers—confirmed that climate change is very real.Physicist Richard Muller, formerly a leading global warming skeptic, led the project and declared “global warming is real” in a Wall Street Journal op-ed: “Climategate was a huge story. I bet debunking Climategate is going to be huger!” Turning to cable news coverage, however, he found the networks had devoted a total of 24 seconds to the story—and infinitely more time to the return of the McRib.Simply put, global warming deniers lobby against constraint of human/fossil fuel industry-caused CO2.“That is bad science, and worse ethics,” says Ron Scholl, in response to an April 11 letter by climate change denier Patrick Moore.It is even worse science and ethics to deny the existence of weather warfare.Scientists repeatedly omitting weather manipulation/warfare in climate change debates and summits make those scientists’ motives seem dubious to me. I phoned organizers of the climate change summit last year when I learned that yet again, they were allocating no time or session for presentations on HAARP, weather manipulation, geo-engneering or weather warfare.I asked, “Why not?” – or rather left a couple of messages with the receptionist asking to speak with someone or at least for her to phone back with an answer. She said someone would call or she’d let me know. They never ddid they ever answer this question that deserves an answer. I’m still waiting.ood article.I have often wondered about the scenario of ”weather warfare”.Climate change is happening right now and though the majority of it is natural, there has to be a small percentage that humans have contributed.The debate will rage on between those ”for and against”, while weather patterns globally get worse.As for weather warfare, i can see something in this and it is feasible to assume that they [various Governments] can do this.Only the truly uninformed would believe the global warming hype. Weather patterns are cyclical droughts, flooding, hurricanes all weather follows reoccurring models. The global warming hoax has more to do with a global carbon tax then weather manipulation. The” global warming” hysteria is just another control paradigm. Don’t fall for it, the manipulators laugh themselves silly every time they put out a load of bogus data and the gullible believe it. If you follow the stories from 2000 the predictions were that by 2012 the poles would be melting at such a rate that  much of Florida and the east coast would be underwater. The problem isn’t “global warming” it’s a global short attention span.RegisterNewsletterIf you really want to ban this commenter, please write down the reason: