Please login or register to follow this user.An El Niño appears increasingly likely this year, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and Australia’s Bureau of Meteorology (BOM). If it starts relatively quickly, then 2014 could well be the hottest year on record, but if it is a strong El Niño, as many currently expect, then 2015 would likely break all previous global records.The BOM’s biweekly ENSO (El Niño Southern Oscillation) Wrap-Up begins:The likelihood of El Niño remains high, with all climate models surveyed by the Bureau now indicating El Niño is likely to occur in 2014. Six of the seven models suggest El Niño thresholds may be exceeded as early as July.The latest weekly ENSO report from NOAA’s National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) puts the chances of an El Niño by the end of the year at almost 2 out of 3:An El Niño is marked by unusually warm ocean temperatures for a period of several months in the Equatorial Pacific, as I discussed in March. In contrast, a La Niña has cooler than normal temps in the same region. Both tend to drive extreme weather worldwide.The following chart from NASA shows that El Niños are generally the hottest years on record — since the regional warming adds to the underlying man-made global trend — whereas La Niña years are usually below the global warming trend line.Chart of global temperature since 1950, also showing the phase of the El Niño-La Niña cycle. Via NASA.The El Niño event of 1997-1998 “was so powerful, it created a +0.2 degrees Celsius temperature anomaly (on top of the 30-year average trend),” as BitsOfScience pointed out earlier this month. That event “started somewhere in May of 1997 and ended almost a full year later, around April 1998. Globally 1997 indeed turned out to be relatively warm (>0.05C above average)” but 1998 was nearly four times as hot.When the El Niño forms and then peaks is crucial to whether 2014 or 2015 (or both) will be the hottest year on record. A 2010 NASA study found the 12-month running-mean global temperature tends to lag the temperature in the key Niño 3.4 region of the equatorial Pacific “by 4 months.”Because 1997/1998 was a “super El Niño,” and because we haven’t had one of those since — or indeed any El Niño at all since 2010 — it can appear as if global warming has slowed (if you cherry-pick a relatively recent start year). But in fact several recent studies have confirmed that planetary warming continues apace everywhere you look, especially the ocean.Recent research finds that one reason the rate of surface warming has the slowed down is that trade winds have sped up in an unprecedented fashion, mixing more heat deeper into the oceans, while bringing cooler water up to the surface. Remember, more than 90 percent of human-induced planetary warming goes into the oceans, while only 2 percent goes into the atmosphere, so small changes in ocean uptake can have huge impact on surface temperatures. The lead author of this study explained when that process ends “as it inevitably will –- our research suggests heat will quickly accumulate in the atmosphere. So global temperatures look set to rise rapidly.”As meteorologist Eric Holthaus notes on Slate, a major El Niño could in fact be the triggering event to the return of the rapid phase of warming surface air temperatures.In that regard, it’s worth noting that as of this week, “With the ever-more certain approach of El Nino, the world ocean surface is starting to radiate more and more heat.” In fact, “temperatures had spiked to an extraordinary +1.12 C hotter than ‘normal’ for the entire global ocean system.”Since this El Niño could be the defining climate event for the next few years, Climate Progress will be reporting on it regularly.The post Does El Niño Plus Global Warming Equal Global Temperature Records In 2014 And 2015? appeared first on ThinkProgress.» Login or register now to comment!Connect:Authored by:Joe Romm is a Fellow at American Progress and is the editor of Climate Progress, which New York Times columnist Tom Friedman called "the indispensable blog" and Time magazine named one of the 25 "Best Blogs of 2010." In 2009, Rolling Stone put Romm #88 on its list of 100 "people who are reinventing America." Time named him a "Hero of the Environment″ and “The Web’s most influential ...See complete profileThe moderated community for energy, policy, and environment professionalsThe Energy Collective ColumnsSiemens: Providing Reliable Power for NigeriaGeoffrey StylesEric ThamDavid TebbuttPeter TroastPatrick FalwellSam Friggens“Turn back the calendar to 1975: The top management team of Kodak is invited by its top-secret R&D team on short notice to witness the demonstration of a prototype for a new technology for photography. Excited, the top management walk the 400 metres across the headquarter complex to the lab, and don the required safety gear. They leave shortly after the demo, laughing discretely or loudly at  ...”“Bob, we can hardly blame the oil industry for offering the public the choice that is most profitable for themselves.  We in the clean energy movement have failed on our part to stand up for the recommendations of the IPCC (that we should use all four tools at our disposal to reduce CO2 emissions: efficiency, renewables, nuclear, and CC&S).  Instead we've embraced a subset that is  ...”“ Find out how low or high are the carbon emissions in our Pa. rural counties where we basically had no polluting industry until gas drilling invaded our towns .....and see the rise in carbon emissions since 2008 in our counties .....after gas drilling started and is now in it's 5 th  or  ...”“And further not so positive news is that despite the current Administration’s  ...”“Rosana, I don't see any difference between "APS hiring lobbyists and  ...”“Sixty years, trillions of dollars invested; how much energy does the solar  ...”“So now solar advocates are claiming that APS is trying to kill solar in  ...”“Eric - Great article.  The growth of the solar industry has been  ...”“What you both seem to ignore is that while distributed PV (DGPV) may cost a bit  ...”“Donald, please refer specifically to the residential case, since most homes are  ...”“Donald, exactly how does distributed PV "generate more value being at the user  ...”“Well said.What is even stranger is that the author ignores the fact that APS is  ...”“Before we go scampering off in the nuclear direction, could we first bring Fukushima-Daiichi under control and maybe have a reasoned debate on whether we want to go down that road?  Unless you are willing to have a nuclear power plant in your backyard, being pro nuclear is real nice as long as  ...”“In addition to what Paul O writes, there is a major problem with the way  ...”“For starters, what business should they conclude they are in? It's certainly  ...”“Let's break this analogy down to a little more detail:1. A digital memory card  ...”“If NG plants emit 550 gCO2/kWh, then a tax of $40 per metric ton is 2.2¢ per  ...”“One of the wildcards in the nuclear field is that thorium, which is currently a  ...”“With net electric demand shrinking due to the contracting economy, the only  ...”“Good comment! It's mandatory to prevent any sudden oil shortages. Thus we must  ...”“Geoffrey, In my view, you are correct that the current environment is not  ...”“Bob,I've been thinking about nuclear-to-fuels for a long time, and I have a  ...”»See them all »Subscribe (iTunes) »Subscribe (RSS)What's New onAbout the panelScott Edward Anderson is a consultant, blogger, and media commentator who blogs at The Green Skeptic. More »Christine Hertzog is a consultant, author, and a professional explainer focused on Smart Grid. More »Elias Hinckley is a strategic advisor on energy finance and energy policy to investors, energy companies and governments More »Gary Hunt Gary is an Executive-in-Residence at Deloitte Investments with extensive experience in the energy & utility industries. More »Jesse Jenkins is a graduate student and researcher at MIT with expertise in energy technology, policy, and innovation. More »Kelly Klima is a Research Scientist at the Department of Engineering and Public Policy of Carnegie Mellon University. More »Jim Pierobon helps trade associations/NGOs, government agencies and companies communicate about cleaner energy solutions. More »Geoffrey Styles is Managing Director of GSW Strategy Group, LLC and an award-winning blogger. More »The Energy CollectiveAdd your own!Renewable Energy Energy Efficiency Energy Risk