Global warming is also known as the green house effect, is a topic that has received much attention, in recent years; yet our Climate change is not a recent problem. Every year, almost 7 billion tons of carbon dioxide is released into the atmosphere by human activity. Global warming is in the earth's upper atmosphere directly caused by human burning of fossil, fuels, industrial, farming, and deforestation. Every year we see natural disasters that are extremely powerful. For example, In April of 2011, the country of Japan was hard hit by an earthquake that took the lives of thousands of people. If we ignore the fact now the result could be catastrophic. As humans, we all have our own opinions, but the problem of global warming should not be debated: it should be solved.

The problem on Global warming has been unsolvable in the last 30 years, but modern day researchers have found various remedies to the problem that we as humans have inflicted on the earth. A phenomenon (otherwise known as 'Climate change of the green house effect') whereby solar radiation that has reflected back of the surface of the earth remains trapped at atmosphere levels, due to the build-up of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gasses, rather than being emitted back into space. The effect of this is a warming of the global atmosphere. People that don't believe in Global warming say that there is no sciencetific proof that earth's temperature is rising. Evidently they never read up on the greenhouse effect. The earth's atmosphere has mix of Nitrogen, Oxygen, and Carbon Dioxide. It means that this mixture is delicate balance that makes the temperature on earth proper for plant and animal life. Global warming is indeed a scan, perpetrated by scientists with vested interests, but in need of crash courses on Geology, logic and philosophy of science. Therefore claiming that global warming is bad, don't really know even know if it really is as bad as they say it is.

When considering Global warming, it is first important to know how recently statistics. Global warming has been caused by the people of the world. Many things have happened as a result. Since the beginning of 20th century, the average surface temperature has increased by 1.1 degree Celsius. Just in the past 40 years. It has risen by a half of a degree. As of now the global sea level is rising three times faster than in the last hundred years when compared to the last three thousand years. This doesn't sound like much right away but any change in temperature causes melting to the polar ice caps. If they continue to melt, the sea level could start to rise dramatically. Furthermore, it is a fact that the average rice in temperature globally is 1.1 degree. The starting fact is that parts of Alaska, Canada, and Northern Russia. They have experienced a rise in temperature by 5 degree Fahrenheit. This means that they are in the Northern hemisphere where there is less water. Less water means less of the new found heat is being taken away be the vast ocean. These gasses are adding up everyday. In 1987 "Carbon Dioxide reached 340 parts per million" and "in the 1999 360 ppm". It is estimated that in 2050 the carbon dioxide count will be 600 ppm.This is at the point in which the global temperature would be "higher than it has ever been and will cause serious problems" unlike the warning sign we are experiencing currently. Clearly the recently statistics demonstrate that global warming has been effected in the world.

We have properly talked about how global warming effect to our earth already. Another thing we should have talked in how to help to reduce the gasses on our earth. Building green homes is important both economical wise and environmental, not only do you help reduce pollution, but making your home energy-efficiently will help you reduce your bill. We can take charge in our own homes to start modifying energy usage. The CFL bulb works the same way as the regular one but making your home energy-efficient energy. This can mean as little as replacing the regular light blub to super-efficient compact fluorescent lights CFLs would be perfect in your house. The most important things in 21 century are home improvement or remodeling. Home improving can mean selecting newer appliances such as air-conditioners, furnaces, water heaters, and refrigerators. Furthermore, after remodeling or replacing the old product to energy-efficient appliances, it is always good idea take care of the huge important for climate as transportation. Transport is responsible for nearly one quarter of greenhouse gas emission world wide, is important but staring 1970 it had increased rapidly worldwide. There are many ways to help reduce the vehicles that are on the road, for every person who drives fuel-efficient cars, car pull, or uses public transportations would be as consider environmental friendlybecause it reduces polluting the atmosphere.
