Montana law has some rules regarding self-defense that could apply to Sunday’s fatal shooting of a teenager in a Grant Creek home, according t…The Missoula man who shot and killed a 17-year-old intruder in his garage early Sunday morning is now facing a felony charge of deliberate homicide.The first crosstown tennis meeting of the season will take place Wednesday at 3 p.m.Maybe it’s going to be Carroll College’s year.Epic in its sheer power and emotional sweep, “Les Miserables” is a once-in-a-lifetime kind of show.BENNY’S BISTRO, 108 E. Sixth Ave., 443-0105. Kevin Hurlbut plays bass guitar Friday, April 25.Not long ago as I read through news stories on the Internet, I noticed something strange.Not far apart one story spoke of Obamacare (if we may call it that), and the other of global warming. There were a few things that struck me as odd about these stories (maybe I am the only one — this I do not know):Obamacare claimed to have some 7.1 million signed up. But they were not completely sure of this figure. Neither were they sure of how many had lost their health insurance because of Obamacare, nor how many of these had signed up. They were not sure of just how many there were that had not had health insurance before the kickoff of Obamacare. They did seem to know that it was more than 100 but less than 100 million, but no real figure. Also of those who did not have insurance, they did not know how many had chosen not to have it.This list could go on, but the point is that there is a lot of things they did not know and that was with the figures in front of them, or so they said.In the article on global warming, a warning was put forth claiming that science is in it, or “so called science” I would rather say. I say “so called” for not long ago they tell us they changed the way they measure some levels and now it appears it is worse than they thought. What did they do with the old figures? Were they thrown out and a new baseline started? How many times has this happened and how many times has science been wrong in the past? They say glaciers once covered Montana. Where are they now if that is true? Where was man’s hand in these glaciers’ demise?The point of all this is that no one knows much about the Obamacare enrollment with the facts in front of them, which is a lot easier than predicting some 50 years down the road about global warming — so should either be believed?Copyright 2014 Helena Independent Record. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.Click here to get an account it's free and quickHint: Enter a keyword that you are looking for like tires, pizza or doctors or browse the full business directory.Lewis & Clark Brewing CompanyPlans for those 65 years and older:Valley FarmsVisit our website for more information.Helena Pediatric Clinic P.C.Username & Password Required!