Approach to the care of long-term testicular cancer survivorsINTRODUCTION — Testicular cancer is the most curable solid tumor and the most common malignancy in men between the ages of 18 and 35. The overall survival rate after diagnosis and treatment of testicular cancer exceeds 96 percent at 10 years. Following treatment for testicular cancer, oncologic follow-up is guided in part by the probability of relapse over time. Although most relapses occur within the first five years, late recurrences can occur.During the period of oncologic follow-up, after active therapy or any time thereafter, patients with a history of testicular cancer may develop symptoms or have abnormal findings on clinical examination. Both primary care clinicians and oncologists may be challenged with questions related to whether or not these symptoms or findings are due to prior treatment.Because of the young age at which men with testicular cancer are diagnosed and success in treatment of testicular cancer, issues of cancer survivorship evolve as men mature. This topic will cover late treatment-related complications in testicular cancer survivors. The discussion is intended for the management of patients who have completed the active phase of cancer therapy and have transitioned to receiving almost all of their care from their primary care clinician. Acute treatment-related toxicity and posttreatment follow-up of men treated for testicular cancer are discussed in more detail separately. (See "Treatment-related toxicity in men with testicular germ cell tumors"and "Posttreatment follow-up for men with testicular germ cell tumors".)A general overview of cancer survivorship is discussed separately. (See "Overview of cancer survivorship care for primary care and oncology providers".)OVERVIEW OF TREATMENT FOR TESTICULAR CANCER — Testicular cancer affects less than 9000 men in the United States each year and usually presents as a nodule or painless swelling of one testicle, which may be noted incidentally by the patient or by his sexual partner [1,2]. The vast majority of testicular cancers are germ cell tumors, which are classified as either seminomas or non-seminomatous germ cell tumors (NSGCTs). Approximately 90 percent are detected with low-stage disease (stage I to IIB) (table 1), and most (60 to 80 percent) will have clinical stage I disease [3].Primary surgery — The primary treatment for testicular cancer is an inguinal orchiectomy. The information from pathology is used to determine pathologic tumor stage (table 1). Following diagnosis, treatment is based on the likelihood of recurrence in order to tailor treatment and minimize the long-term side effects.Fertility preservation — When testicular cancer is suspected in men of reproductive age, counseling regarding sperm banking as a means of fertility preservation is routinely performed prior to initiation of any form of treatment. However, less than 30 percent of men actually choose to bank sperm and an even smaller proportion (10 percent) actually use banked sperm to father a child [4,5]. Despite this, many patients treated for testicular cancer go on to become fathers naturally with recovery of spermatogenesis achieved in 80 percent five years after diagnosis [6]. (See 'Hypogonadism' below.)Primary treatment — Key elements used to determine the treatment plan include (see "Overview of the treatment of testicular germ cell tumors"):?Histology (ie, seminoma versus NSGCT)?Presence or absence of metastases (table 2)?Degree of elevation in serum tumor markersThe prognosis is excellent for most patients with testicular cancer regardless of treatment. Treatment options after orchiectomy include:?Surveillance – Active surveillance following orchiectomy is an option specifically for men with stage I seminoma or NSGCT. These patients have an extremely high cure rate following inguinal orchiectomy alone. (See "Active surveillance following orchiectomy for stage I testicular germ cell tumors".)?Radiation therapy (RT) – RT is an alternative option for men with stage I or II seminoma, although surveillance is the preferred approach for men with stage I disease. If administered to men with stage I seminoma, RT is directed to the paraaortic nodes to a dose of 20 Gy. For men with non-bulky stage II seminoma, 30 to 35 Gy RT to the paraaortic and ipsilateral iliac nodes may be used as an alternative to chemotherapy. (See "Treatment of stage II seminoma".)?Chemotherapy – Chemotherapy is an option for men with testicular germ cell tumors regardless of disease stage. It is estimated that up to 20 percent of men will require primary chemotherapy for cure [6].•Single-agent carboplatin can be administered to men with stage I seminoma who are not candidates for surveillance (ie, poorly compliant with medical follow-up) and is an alternative to RT.•Combination cisplatin-based chemotherapy generally consists of bleomycin and etoposide plus cisplatin (BEP) or etoposide plus cisplatin (EP). It may be offered to men with stage II seminoma (as an alternative to RT) or to men with early-stage NSGCT (stage IB to IIB).•For men with advanced germ cell tumors, primary treatment consists of cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy (either BEP or EP). Surgery is often used to supplement chemotherapy in select patients with residual disease. (See 'Resection of residual disease following chemotherapy' below.)?Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection – A primary retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND) is a treatment option for men with stage I and some patients with non-bulky stage II NSGCTs. (See "Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection for early stage nonseminomatous testicular germ cell tumors".)Resection of residual disease following chemotherapy?Seminoma – For men with seminomas, surgery of a residual mass may not be necessary. One-half of men with residual masses will have resolution of these findings during surveillance at a median of one year. However, the routine resection of larger residual masses (≥3 cm) is controversial. Positron emission tomography (PET) scans may be useful in detecting residual disease in this setting. This topic is discussed in detail elsewhere. (See "Treatment of stage II seminoma", section on 'Post therapy residual masses'.)For men with residual retroperitoneal adenopathy that demonstrates fludeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake on PET at the end of treatment, postchemotherapy RPLND is sometimes performed, although this surgery should be restricted to specialized centers where a large number of testicular cancer patients are seen. Following resection of residual masses that contain viable tumor, at least two further courses of chemotherapy are generally advised. (See "Approach to surgery following primary treatment for advanced testicular germ cell tumors", section on 'Role of adjuvant chemotherapy'.)?NSGCT – Residual masses are commonly seen on postchemotherapy imaging studies in men with NSGCTs and standard of care is to resect these lesions. Approximately 60 percent of patients with postchemotherapy residual masses will either have viable cancer or teratoma. As long as tumor markers have normalized, surgical resection is preferred over further chemotherapy. (See "Approach to surgery following primary treatment for advanced testicular germ cell tumors", section on 'Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection'.)FOLLOW-UP POSTTREATMENT — Follow-up care for men who have successfully completed therapy for testicular cancer consists of periodic history and physical examinations (including testicular examination), assessment of serum tumor markers (beta-human chorionic gonadotropin [?-hCG], alpha-fetoprotein [AFP], and lactate dehydrogenase [LDH]) if indicated, and radiographic studies. (See "Active surveillance following orchiectomy for stage I testicular germ cell tumors", section on 'Active surveillance protocols' and "Posttreatment follow-up for men with testicular germ cell tumors", section on 'Guidelines for follow-up'.)Factors that influence the nature and intensity of follow-up after completion of initial definitive therapy include the histology (seminoma versus nonseminomatous germ cell tumor [NSGCT]), original risk-stratification group (for men presenting with advanced disease (table 2)), and treatment (particularly the use of surgery or radiation therapy (RT) to treat the retroperitoneal lymph nodes).  The intensity of follow-up is guided in part by the probability of relapse over time. For men with seminoma, the median time to relapse is 13 to 16 months (range 2 to 108 months), but up to one-third of relapses occur more than three years after completion of treatment [7,8]. In contrast, over 95 percent of relapses of NSGCTs occur within the first two years following orchiectomy [9].Although most relapses occur within the first five years for both seminoma and NSGCT, late recurrences can occur [10,11]. Based upon this type of observation, follow-up is most intensive during the first year or two after treatment and then gradually decreases. There are no guidelines to inform the frequency of routine imaging or blood work for the long-term survivor of testicular cancer, particularly after the first five years have passed. However, most groups now recommend that follow-up continue for at least ten years following successful therapy because of the risk of late relapse. Therefore, cancer surveillance should be coordinated between the primary care provider and the oncology team. (See "Posttreatment follow-up for men with testicular germ cell tumors".)ORGAN-SPECIFIC EFFECTS OF TREATMENTCardiovascular disease — There are conflicting data regarding the risk of cardiovascular disease among testicular cancer survivors, including myocardial infarction, angina pectoris, heart failure, and peripheral vascular disease [12-16]. However, much of the available literature suggests there is a relationship between treatment for testicular cancer and cardiovascular disease. As examples:?In a cohort of 2512 five-year testicular cancer survivors, 694 cardiac-related events were recorded in 434 patients [15]. The overall standardized incidence ratio (SIR) for myocardial infarction and angina pectoris was 1.17 (95% CI 1.04-1.31). This increased risk was noted in men <45 years but not in men >55 years. Combination chemotherapy (cisplatin, vinblastine, bleomycin [PVB] or bleomycin, cisplatin, and etoposide [BEP]) and mediastinal radiation therapy (RT) were associated with increased cardiovascular risk.  ?In another study of 992 patients treated between 1982 and 1992 for testicular cancer with a median follow-up time of 10.2 years, RT was associated with an increased risk for cardiac events (relative risk [RR] 2.4, 95% CI 1.0-5.5) [16]. The risk was slightly higher when RT was combined with chemotherapy (RR 2.8, 95% CI 1.1-7.1).Metabolic syndrome — The metabolic syndrome (insulin resistance syndrome or syndrome X) represents a cluster of risk factors that result in an increased incidence of, and mortality from, cardiovascular disease. The association between cancer treatment and the prevalence of the metabolic syndrome in long-term testicular cancer survivors was evaluated in a study that included 251 testicular cancer survivors (cases) and 360 health subjects (controls) [17]. Among cases, 174, 57, and 20 men were previously treated with combination chemotherapy, single-agent carboplatin, or surgery alone, respectively. Main findings were as follows:?Testicular cancer survivors had an almost twofold higher risk of metabolic syndrome compared with controls (14 versus 8 percent, respectively, odds ratio [OR] 1.9, 95% CI 1.1-3.2).?Men treated with combination chemotherapy had the highest prevalence of metabolic syndrome (17 percent). However, the prevalence among men treated with surgery alone or single-agent carboplatin was similar to that of healthy controls (10 and 9 percent, respectively).Further discussion of the metabolic syndrome, including diagnostic criteria and an approach to treatment, is covered separately. (See "The metabolic syndrome (insulin resistance syndrome or syndrome X)".)Gastrointestinal disorders — Men treated with RT for testicular cancer are at an increased risk of duodenal or gastric ulcers as a late complication of RT, although the overall risk is very small [18]. Biliary stenosis was reported in one study as a result of radiation-induced retroperitoneal fibrosis [19].Pulmonary toxicity — Testicular cancer survivors are at an increased risk of long-term pulmonary toxicity, especially in those who received bleomycin. Cisplatin has also been associated with restrictive lung disease. Pulmonary sequelae are of greatest concern in men who continue to use tobacco.Bleomycin-induced lung injury — Bleomycin exerts its antitumor effect by inducing programmed cell death, by inhibiting angiogenesis, and by the formation of free radicals. The enzyme required to deactivate bleomycin, bleomycin hydrolase, is not present in lung tissue and results in pulmonary injury. Short-term pulmonary complications (defined as occurring within the first three years) of bleomycin are seen in up to 46 percent of patients, but most are mild and self-limited; only a small fraction of bleomycin-treated patients develop pulmonary fibrosis [20]. However, the risk of fatality in patients who develop bleomycin-associated pulmonary fibrosis is on the order of 10 percent [20-22]. In one series of 835 men with testicular cancer who had been treated with a bleomycin-containing regimen, 57 men (7 percent) developed bleomycin pulmonary toxicity, and eight men (14 percent) died as a result. (See "Bleomycin-induced lung injury".)Hypogonadism — Men treated with chemotherapy or RT are at a long-term risk for chemical hypogonadism, which is associated with infertility and poor quality of life across multiple domains, including sexual, physical, and role function [16,23,24]. (See "Treatment-related toxicity in men with testicular germ cell tumors", section on 'Gonadal effects'.)Infertility — The risk of infertility is dependent on prior treatment received. Men treated with chemotherapy and those treated with extended-field RT are at greatest risk.As an example, in a study involving 1433 men, treatment following orchiectomy consisted of surveillance, retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND), RT, low-dosecisplatin, or high-dose cisplatin (ie, >850 mg cisplatin) [25]. Forty percent of men attempted posttreatment conception with the following findings:?Successful conception was highest among men who underwent surveillance (81 percent) and RPLND (77 percent). It was lowest in men who received high-dose cisplatin(38 percent).  ?Among survivors of seminoma treated with radiation, 63 percent successfully conceived. This rate was significantly higher among men who underwent radiation restricted to the paraaortic area (82 percent).?Men with dry ejaculation following high-dose chemotherapy or who had undergone a non-nerve-sparing RPLND were the least likely to achieve conception.In light of the significant infertility risk, sperm banking prior to the initiation of therapy is routinely discussed. Further discussion on the impact of treatment on spermatogenesis is covered separately. (See "Treatment-related toxicity in men with testicular germ cell tumors", section on 'Spermatogenesis' and 'Fertility preservation'above.)Sexual dysfunction — Sexual function may be affected in testicular cancer survivors due to hypogonadism and other factors, including increasing age, lack of a partner, and heightened anxiety [16,26]. Although the incidence of sexual dysfunction was only slightly higher among testicular cancer survivors compared with men without testicular cancer (39 versus 36 percent), in one study, testicular cancer survivors had significantly worse scores pertaining to ejaculatory and sexual problems [27].Renal impairment — Although the greatest risk to the kidneys is during active treatment with nephrotoxic agents (eg, cisplatin), testicular cancer survivors are at risk for impaired renal function after chemotherapy has ended. This was illustrated in a study of 85 patients prospectively followed for a median of 14 years after treatment with surgery alone (n = 14), radiation (n = 18), or multimodality treatment that included cisplatin-based chemotherapy (n = 53) [28]. The incidence of renal dysfunction (defined as creatinine level <70 percent of the upper limit of normal) was 29 percent. The cumulative dose of cisplatin was the only risk factor associated with nephrotoxicity. Among those who received chemotherapy, there was a 14 percent loss of renal function.Neurotoxicity — Patients with testicular cancer are at increased risk for persistent peripheral neuropathy and ototoxicity, particularly if they were previously treated with a platinum-based regimen. A 2011 evaluation showed that residual platinum could be detected more than a decade following treatment and that the risk of neurotoxicity was associated with higher levels of residual platinum [29]. Patient risk may vary with polymorphisms in the gene for glutathione S-transferase, which detoxifies reactive metabolites [30-32].Peripheral neuropathy — Patients treated with cisplatin are at risk for neuropathy that may persist long after treatment has completed. This was illustrated in a cross-sectional study of 1409 testicular cancer survivors followed for a median of 11 years [33]. Of those treated with chemotherapy, 39 percent reported Raynaud-like phenomena (defined as white or cold hands/fingers or feet/toes on cold exposure), and 29 percent reported paresthesias in the hands or feet. Peripheral nerve damage is a rare complication following RT [34].Ototoxicity — Patients treated with cisplatin display evidence of cochlear toxicity manifested by high-frequency hearing loss (3 to 8 kHz) and tinnitus [35]. In a mail survey of testicular cancer survivors 35 to 44 years of age, the reported incidence of hearing loss was twice the national average for this age range [36].The prevalence of hearing loss in testicular cancer survivors is illustrated in the following studies:?In a study of 86 testicular cancer survivors, 66 percent had abnormal audiograms [37]. This was accompanied by tinnitus and/or hearing loss in 20 percent.?In a cross-sectional study of 1319 testicular cancer survivors, 21 percent reported hearing impairment, and 22 percent reported tinnitus [33]. Patients who received chemotherapy were more likely to have hearing impairment and tinnitus than those who did not, and there was greater risk for those who received more than five cycles of chemotherapy.Non-traumatic osteonecrosis — Non-traumatic osteonecrosis is most commonly seen as a complication of prolonged corticosteroid use. However, it has been reported as a rare complication of chemotherapy, particularly in men treated for testicular cancer. A 2008 literature review identified 54 cases of non-traumatic osteonecrosis, with 70 percent of these reported in testicular cancer survivors, all of whom were treated with cisplatin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and/or etoposide [38]. In these reports, the femoral head was most often affected, with 75 percent experiencing bilateral involvement. However, the overall prevalence appears to be on the order of 1.5 to 4 percent [39,40].SECONDARY MALIGNANCIES — Testicular cancer survivors have an increased risk of secondary malignancies, including solid tumors, nonmelanoma skin cancers, and leukemias [41,42]. Contralateral testicular cancers may occur but are not common.  Solid tumors — Men treated for testicular cancer have at least a twofold increased risk of developing a second solid tumor in their lifetime, especially if prior treatment consisted of both chemotherapy and radiation therapy (RT) [43-45]. This was demonstrated in a study involving 40,576 men [43]. For patients who survived at least ten years after diagnosis, the relative risk (RR) of developing a solid tumor compared with the general population was reported as follows:?For patients treated with radiotherapy, the RR was 2.0 (95% CI 1.9-2.2).?For patients who received both radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the RR was 2.9 (95% CI 1.9-4.2).The most common solid tumors arose from the lung, colon, bladder, pancreas, and stomach. The risk of developing a solid tumor increased over time and persisted for at least 30 years after treatment.The risk of a second malignancy after chemotherapy as a single-modality therapy for testicular cancer appears to be elevated and remains so for years after treatment has completed. This was shown in a population-based study involving almost 13,000 men treated for testicular nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (NSGCTs) treated with eithercisplatin-based chemotherapy or surgery without RT [46]. While there was no increased risk of solid tumors among men treated with surgery, treatment with chemotherapy was associated with:?A significantly increased risk of a solid cancer (standardized incidence ratio 1.43, 95% CI 1.18-1.73) with a median latency of 12.5 years?An increased risk that persisted to more than 20 years after treatment had completed?An increased risk primarily for thyroid, renal, and soft tissue malignancies  Skin cancers — Testicular cancer survivors are at risk for nonmelanoma skin cancers. This was illustrated in a study on the risk of second malignancies among 29,511 testicular cancer survivors [42]:?The standardized incidence ratio (SIR) for melanoma of the skin was 1.62 (95% CI 1.29-2.01).?For nonmelanoma skin cancer, the SIR was 2.26 (95% CI 1.97-2.57).In addition, one study suggested that testicular cancer survivors were at an increased risk of developing dysplastic nevi compared with healthy controls (37 versus 15 percent, respectively) [47]. In that same population, two testicular cancer survivors ultimately developed melanoma.Hematologic malignancies — The risk of leukemia is also increased after treatment for testicular cancer, but not to the same extent as solid tumors. In one study involving 18,567 men treated between 1970 and 1993, 36 men (0.2 percent) developed a secondary leukemia [48]. Compared with matched controls, men who developed a secondary leukemia had received a higher total dose of radiation and were more likely to have received a cisplatin-based regimen.Contralateral testicular cancer — Men with a prior history of testicular cancer are at increased risk for contralateral testicular cancer, although the overall risks are low. In several studies, this risk ranged from 1 to 3 percent over 10 to 20 years of follow-up [49,50].CHRONIC FATIGUE — Chronic fatigue, characterized as a subjective sense of tiredness that interferes with usual functioning, has been reported in long-term testicular cancer survivors [51,52]. In one study of 1431 testicular cancer survivors followed for an average of 11 years posttreatment, chronic fatigue was noted in 17 percent compared with 10 percent among 1080 age-matched controls [52]. Chronic fatigue was associated with poor quality of life, psychosocial and somatic problems, and neuroticism. In another study, chronic fatigue was also more common in men who were less physically active and those who smoked [53]. A discussion of chronic fatigue is covered separately. (See "Cancer-related fatigue: Treatment" and "Treatment of chronic fatigue syndrome".)PSYCHOLOGIC DISTRESS — Long-term survivors of testicular cancer have a higher incidence of anxiety disorder than seen in the general population, but are not at an increased risk for depression [53,54]. This was illustrated in a study of 1400 testicular cancer survivors evaluated for anxiety and depression using the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) [54]. Compared with age-adjusted norms, testicular cancer survivors reported a higher risk of anxiety (relative risk [RR] 1.5, 95% CI 1.3-1.7) but not depression (RR 0.96, 95% CI 0.81-1.14). Factors associated with increased anxiety included: young age, presence of peripheral neuropathy, economic problems, alcohol problems, relapse anxiety, and prior treatment for psychological problems.A 2013 population-based study that included over 9000 men treated for stage I seminoma suggested that men in long-term follow-up are at an increased risk of suicide [55]. At a median follow-up of 12 years, 915 (10 percent) of the men had died and of these, 39 (4 percent) had committed suicide, making it the fifth most common cause of death in these men. Compared with an age-adjusted general male population, this represented a significantly elevated risk of death due to suicide (standardized mortality ratio 1.45, 95% CI 1.06-1.98). Although these data require confirmation, they highlight the importance of longitudinal follow-up for psychologic distress in this population.FOLLOW-UP FOR LONG-TERM SURVIVORS OF TESTICULAR CANCER — In view of the number of possible long-term consequences of treatment for testicular cancer and the young age at which many men undergo treatment, long-term follow-up is suggested. However, self-reporting of new symptoms by patients is as important as the formal follow-up schedule for testicular cancer survivors, particularly in the detection of secondary malignancies.  In a retrospective study of 1057 patients in long-term follow-up (consisting of yearly history, physical examination, germ cell tumor markers, abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan, and chest x-ray), 57 men (5.4 percent) developed a secondary malignancy (after a median follow-up of 10 years) [56]. Of these, 54, 29, and 27 percent were detected by patients (or their relatives) due to new symptoms, by non-oncology providers (in the context of a scheduled clinical visit), and during oncologic follow-up, respectively. Symptoms or signs of a second cancer were present in 71 percent of cases. The diagnosis was made based on new findings on imaging in 30 percent.  We suggest the following guidelines for long-term testicular cancer survivors [57]:?Complete physical examination, annually – Testicular cancer survivors should undergo a complete physical examination annually, with weight and blood pressure recorded. The examination should include a lymph node survey and examination of the contralateral testicle [57]. An examination of the skin for dysplastic nevi should be performed. Particular attention should be paid to cardiovascular, pulmonary, and/or neurologic complaints. There should be a high index of suspicion for second cancers.?Baseline lipid profile.?Renal function (serum creatinine) and serum magnesium annually (for patients who received cisplatin-based chemotherapy).?Serial assessment of hormonal function (ie, testosterone and luteinizing hormone levels) on a regular basis, particularly for men treated with chemotherapy or radiation therapy (RT). There are no evidence-based guidelines to inform an optimal surveillance strategy, but a reasonable approach is to test hormonal function annually in long-term survivors, especially in men who may be hypogonadal based on symptoms (eg, poor energy, sexual dysfunction, depression, fatigue) or signs (obesity, small testicular size, poor muscular development).  In addition, patients should be:?Counseled about the importance of reporting new symptoms early.?Encouraged to adopt a healthy lifestyle, including a heart-healthy diet, regular exercise, and weight loss when needed to achieve a body mass index <25 [13,58].?Encouraged to avoid smoking and excess alcohol intake [58].For those patients with persistent adverse effects from treatment:?Men suspected of persistent otologic toxicity should be counseled to avoid loud noise. An audiogram should be performed in patients who report hearing loss or tinnitus, especially if there is a prior history of cisplatin therapy. However, clinicians should recognize that causes unrelated to treatment may be responsible for hearing impairment.  ?Men with residual peripheral neuropathy should be counseled to avoid exposure to other potential neurotoxins such as alcohol. Our approach utilizes both complementary therapies (eg, physical therapy, massage, and acupuncture) and behavioral modifications aimed at helping patients recognize situations associated with increased symptoms and to avoid them. Pharmacologic options to treat neuropathic symptoms are discussed separately. (See "Overview of polyneuropathy", section on 'Treatment of symptoms and prevention of complications'.)?Men who report difficulty with fertility issues should undergo a semen analysis and prompt referral to a reproductive endocrine specialist.?Men with symptoms of anxiety or distress should be referred for treatment if indicated. Anxiety disorder is somewhat more prevalent in testicular cancer survivors.?Men with hypogonadism should be offered testosterone treatment. (See "Testosterone treatment of male hypogonadism".)Oncologic follow-up (with serum tumor markers, chest x-ray, and computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis, as indicated) should be coordinated between the primary oncology team and the primary care provider to ensure that services are not duplicated. For long-term cancer survivors (ie, >10 years post-diagnosis), a decision to discontinue cancer surveillance should be based on patient preference and discussion between the primary care and oncology teams [1,57].Surveillance for at least the first five years is discussed separately. (See "Posttreatment follow-up for men with testicular germ cell tumors", section on 'Guidelines for follow-up' and "Overview of cancer survivorship care for primary care and oncology providers", section on 'Coordination of care'.)  SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS?The prognosis for men with testicular cancer is excellent. Nonetheless, compared with the general population, testicular cancer survivors face a higher risk of death from noncancer causes and long-term complications that may affect long-term quality of life. (See 'Introduction' above.)?Testicular cancer survivors are at an increased risk for cardiovascular disease, particularly among men who received chemotherapy or were treated with mediastinal radiation therapy (RT). (See 'Cardiovascular disease' above.)?Testicular cancer survivors are at an increased risk of long-term pulmonary toxicity, especially in those who received bleomycin and/or cisplatin and continue to use tobacco. (See 'Pulmonary toxicity' above.)?Hypogonadism can be seen as a long-term complication from treatment of testicular cancer, particularly among men treated with extended-field RT or cisplatin-based chemotherapy. It can result in infertility and issues related to sexual dysfunction. (See 'Hypogonadism' above.)?Men treated with cisplatin-based chemotherapy are at increased risk for both renal dysfunction and neurotoxicity. Renal function (with creatinine and magnesium levels) should be assessed annually in men who received cisplatin-based chemotherapy. (See 'Renal impairment' above and 'Neurotoxicity' above.)?Men treated for testicular cancer have at least a twofold increased risk of developing a second malignancy in their lifetime, especially if prior treatment consisted of both chemotherapy and RT. (See 'Secondary malignancies' above.)?Testicular cancer survivors should undergo a complete physical examination annually, with weight and blood pressure recorded. Particular attention should be paid to cardiovascular or neurologic complaints. (See 'Follow-up for long-term survivors of testicular cancer' above.)?Oncologic follow-up within the first five years following diagnosis should be coordinated between the primary oncology team and the primary care provider to ensure that services are not duplicated. (See 'Follow-up posttreatment' above and "Posttreatment follow-up for men with testicular germ cell tumors", section on 'Guidelines for follow-up'.)?For long-term cancer survivors (ie, >5 to 10 years post-diagnosis), a decision to discontinue cancer surveillance should be based upon patient preference and following a discussion between the primary care and oncology teams. (See 'Follow-up for long-term survivors of testicular cancer' above.)