Postmenopausal hormone therapy: Benefits and risks
INTRODUCTION — Normal women have menopause at a mean age of 51 years, with 95 percent becoming menopausal between the ages of 45 to 55 years. Estrogen is the most effective treatment available for relief of menopausal symptoms, most importantly, hot flashes. Postmenopausal hormone therapy (estrogen alone or combined with a progestin) is currently indicated for management of menopausal symptoms.

An overview of the risks and benefits of postmenopausal hormone therapy will be provided here. The management of women with hot flashes and other menopausal symptoms is reviewed in greater detail separately. (See "Menopausal hot flashes" and "Treatment of menopausal symptoms with hormone therapy", section on 'Candidates/indications'.)

OVERVIEW — Postmenopausal hormone therapy continues to play an important role in the management of hot flashes. It is highly effective for the management of hot flashes, vaginal atrophy and, in some cases, the mood lability that many women experience during the menopausal transition [1]. Details on management of vasomotor symptoms are reviewed in detail separately. The use of vaginal estrogen for vaginal atrophy is also reviewed separately. (See "Treatment of menopausal symptoms with hormone therapy" and "Menopausal hot flashes" and "Treatment of vaginal atrophy".)

In the past, hormone therapy was also often prescribed for prevention of coronary heart disease (CHD) and osteoporosis, based upon epidemiologic data demonstrating a protective effect of estrogen on the heart and bone. However, data from the Women's Health Initiative (WHI), a set of two hormone therapy trials (unopposed estrogen and continuous, combined estrogen-progestin therapy versus placebo), in healthy postmenopausal women (mean age 63 years) showed a number of adverse outcomes, including an excess risk of CHD, stroke, venous thromboembolism, and breast cancer [2-4].

Similar results were noted in a meta-analysis of 23 trials [5], and an updated 2012 United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) meta-analysis of nine trials [6]. Both included the WHI, and the mean age of subjects was >60 years. In the USPSTF analysis, results were largely based upon the WHI. Based upon their current meta-analysis, the USPSTF continues to recommend against the use of both combined estrogen and progestin and unopposed estrogen (for women post-hysterectomy) for the prevention of chronic conditions [6,7]. However, they note that this recommendation does not apply to women considering using hormone therapy for relief of menopausal symptoms [7,8].

Most experts suggest that combined therapy be limited to five years of use (because of an increased risk of breast cancer). However, there may be more flexibility in duration of use with unopposed estrogen. (See 'Breast cancer' below.)

While the WHI clearly demonstrated the adverse effects of hormone therapy in older postmenopausal women (over age 60 years), this is not the age group that presents with new onset of menopausal symptoms. Almost all women who seek medical therapy for menopausal symptoms do so in their late 40s or 50s. (See 'Estimates of risk in women 50 to 59 years' below.)

When counseling women about postmenopausal hormone therapy, the clinician should provide estimates for the absolute risks and benefits for up to five years of treatment in young postmenopausal women (eg, <10 years postmenopausal, or ages 50 to 59 years). Women should be reassured that the absolute risk of complications for healthy, young postmenopausal women taking hormone therapy for five years is very low.

ESTIMATES OF RISK IN WOMEN 50 TO 59 YEARS — Most women who seek hormone therapy for menopausal symptoms are in their late 40s or early 50s, and current guidelines suggest that hormone therapy be used only short-term for symptom relief (up to five years). When counseling symptomatic women considering hormone therapy, the clinician should provide the best estimate of potential risks and benefits for five years of use based upon data from women in their 50s.

Although most available hormone therapy clinical trial data is from women over age 60 years, estimates of the absolute risks and benefits for women starting menopausal hormone therapy in their 50s has been published (figure 1) [9]. The Women's Health Initiative (WHI) was the major source of data for the analysis, although other studies were used as well. Of note, these estimates are based upon low quality evidence because both the number of subjects and events in women ages 50 to 59 years in the WHI was small. However, the numbers here are similar to those reported in a 2013 WHI follow-up report [4].

Data was expressed as the attributable excess risk or benefit for five years of combined estrogen plus progestin (E+P) or unopposed estrogen (E) use in women starting treatment between ages 50 to 59 years (or <10 years postmenopause) (figure 1) [9]:

Benefit or no effect

●Coronary heart disease (CHD): 0.9 and 3.8 fewer cases per 1000 women per five years of E+P and E use, respectively
●Mortality: 5.3 and 5 fewer deaths per 1000 women per five years of E+P and E use, respectively
●Fracture: 4.9 and 5.9 fewer cases per 1000 women per five years of E+P and E use, respectively
●Breast cancer: 1.5 fewer cases per 1000 women per five years of unopposed estrogen use (WHI hazard ratios of breast cancer risk not used for this estimate as they were thought to be considerably lower compared with most previous reports; authors used data from Nurses’ Health Study [10]. A slight reduction in risk was still seen)
●Type 2 diabetes: 11 fewer cases per 1000 women per five years (for E+P and E use combined)
●Colorectal cancer: 1.2 fewer cases per 1000 women per five years of use for E+P only
Risk

●Stroke: 1.0 and 1.2 additional cases per 1000 women per five years of E+P and E use, respectively
●Venous thromboembolism (VTE): 5 and 2 additional cases per 1000 women per five years of E+P and E use, respectively
●Breast cancer: 6.8 additional cases per 1000 women per five years of E+P (WHI hazard ratios of breast cancer risk not used for this estimate as they were thought to be considerably lower compared with most previous reports; authors used data from Nurses’ Health Study [10])
●Cholecystitis: 9.6 and 14.2 additional cases per 1000 women per five years of E+P and E use, respectively (data from women of all ages in WHI used for calculation; no data available for women 50 to 59 years)
This analysis highlights that the overall risks of hormone therapy in younger postmenopausal women are considerably lower than those for older women (eg, women in the WHI). The major explanation for the difference in absolute excess risk between older and younger postmenopausal women is the lower baseline risk of CHD, stroke, VTE, and breast cancer in younger postmenopausal women [9].

A comprehensive overview of findings of the intervention and postintervention phases of the WHI (a total of 13 years of follow-up) highlighted differences in the risk-benefit profiles between combined conjugated estrogen-medroxyprogesterone acetate and unopposed conjugated estrogen therapy, as well as the impact of age on the effects of hormone therapy [4]. As summarized throughout this topic, combined therapy was associated with a higher risk of CHD and breast cancer than unopposed estrogen. Results of women ages 50 to 59 years taking unopposed estrogen were similar to those described above [9]: a lower risk of CHD and breast cancer than those receiving placebo (with a calculated decrease of 5.5 and 2.5 events per 1000 women taking five years of therapy). However, results in young women taking combined therapy were somewhat different than those above [9], and showed a slight excess risk of CHD and breast cancer (3 and 2.5 additional cases of CHD and breast cancer per 1000 women treated for five years). This would still be considered to be low risk, particularly in the context of using hormone therapy for moderate to severe symptoms, but it reinforces the concept that hormone therapy should not currently be used for prevention of disease.

CARDIOVASCULAR EFFECTS — The Women's Health Initiative (WHI) reported that many of the apparent benefits of postmenopausal hormone therapy seen in epidemiologic studies were not found in the randomized trials. Rather than a reduction in risk of coronary heart disease (CHD) events, an increase was seen. Possible methodologic explanations for the striking difference in CHD data include "healthy user" bias, older age of the study population, and timing of initiation of therapy [11,12]. (See "Postmenopausal hormone therapy and cardiovascular risk", section on 'Timing of exposure' and "Estrogen and cognitive function".)

Coronary heart disease — The overall rate of coronary events was increased with combined conjugated equine estrogen-medroxyprogesterone acetate (CEE-MPA) therapy (plus eight additional events per 10,000 person-years, respectively; hazard ratio [HR] 1.23, 95% CI -0.3-16.0) [13,14]. (See "Postmenopausal hormone therapy and cardiovascular risk", section on 'Coronary heart disease'.)

In the unopposed estrogen trial, use of CEE did not appear to affect the incidence of CHD events over an average follow-up of 6.8 years (HR for CEE versus placebo 0.96, 95% CI 0.78-1.16 [three fewer events per 10,000 person years]) [3,13].

Younger postmenopausal women — Data from a coronary angiographic study [15], a WHI coronary artery calcification study and age-based subgroup analysis [13,16], and a meta-analysis that included the WHI [17] all suggest that the timing of treatment initiation affects the risk of CHD; in the WHI, women who were <10 years since menopause or between the ages of 50 to 59 years did not have excess risk [13], or possibly had a reduction in risk [17]. (See "Postmenopausal hormone therapy and cardiovascular risk", section on 'Timing of exposure'.)

Additional reassuring data come from clinical trial data in younger postmenopausal women:

●The KEEPS study (Kronos Early Estrogen Prevention Study), a four-year, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial (in women ages 45 to 54 years) reported that when combined with cyclical monthly oral progesterone, oral conjugated estrogen (0.45 mg daily) or transdermal estrogen (50 mcg daily) reduced menopausal symptoms. Surrogate markers of atherosclerosis (coronary artery calcium and carotid intima-medial thickness) were not significantly different in the hormone therapy and placebo groups [18,19].
●A subgroup analysis of a 10-year postmenopausal hormone therapy trial for osteoporosis reported that women taking hormone therapy had a reduced risk of the composite outcome of mortality, heart failure, or myocardial infarction, without an increased risk of stroke, venous thromboembolism or cancer [20]. However, there are methodologic concerns about this study, including lack of placebo group [21], and use of a composite outcome that was not described in the original study protocol [22].
Estimates of the risks and benefits for younger postmenopausal women taking five years of hormone therapy are described above. (See 'Estimates of risk in women 50 to 59 years' above.)

Stroke — In the WHI, a 31 percent increase in stroke risk was seen with combined CEE-MPA use compared with placebo (intention-to-treat HR 1.31, 95% CI 1.02-1.68). The increase in risk is for ischemic but not hemorrhagic stroke [23]. Excess risk was seen in all age groups [13] and was independent of other known risk factors for stroke. In the unopposed estrogen trial, stroke risk was significantly increased with CEE versus placebo (HR 1.39, HR 1.1 to 1.77) [3].

In a subgroup analysis that combined data from both trials, the relative risk of stroke did not vary by patient age. However, the authors calculated an extremely low absolute excess risk of stroke in women ages 50 to 59 years (0.15 versus 0.13 cases per 100 women per year for hormone therapy and placebo, respectively) [13].

Stroke risk appears to be lower with transdermal compared with oral estrogen preparations. (See "Postmenopausal hormone therapy and cardiovascular risk", section on 'Stroke'.)

Estimates of the risks and benefits for younger postmenopausal women taking five years of hormone therapy are described above. (See 'Estimates of risk in women 50 to 59 years' above.)

Venous thromboembolism — The rate of venous thromboembolism (VTE) in the WHI increased with combined CEE-MPA therapy (34 versus 16 per 10,000 person-years, HR 2.06, unadjusted 95% CI 1.6-2.7) [24]. The increase in risk was similar for both deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE) and was also seen in the Heart and Estrogen/progestin Replacement Study (HERS) trials.

VTE risk was also increased with unopposed CEE when compared with placebo (HR 1.33, 95% CI 0.99-1.79) [3]. However, only the increased rate of DVT reached statistical significance.

For women ages 50 to 59 years, the group most likely to be taking hormone therapy, the estimates of excess venous thromboembolism risk in one analysis were 4.7 and 1.3 additional cases per 1000 women per five years of combined estrogen-progestin or unopposed estrogen use, respectively [9]. (See 'Estimates of risk in women 50 to 59 years' above.)

The risk of venous thromboembolism appears to be lower with transdermal compared with oral estrogen preparations. In addition, risk may vary by type of progestin (higher with medroxyprogesterone acetate). This issue is discussed in greater detail elsewhere. (See "Postmenopausal hormone therapy and cardiovascular risk", section on 'Venous thromboembolism'.)

MORTALITY — In the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) and Heart and Estrogen/progestin Replacement Study (HERS) trials, there were no differences in total mortality between the hormone therapy and placebo groups [2,3,25]. However, when the WHI was reanalyzed by patient age, a significant 30 percent mortality reduction was seen in women under 60 years of age [13].

For women ages 50 to 59 years, the group most likely to be taking hormone therapy, the estimate of mortality benefit in one analysis was 5.3 and 5 fewer deaths per 1000 per five years of combined estrogen-progestin or unopposed estrogen use, respectively [9]. (See 'Estimates of risk in women 50 to 59 years' above.)

Other evidence for the effect of hormone therapy on mortality comes from a metaanalysis of 19 randomized, controlled trials in younger postmenopausal women, including age-specific data (women 50 to 59 years) from the two WHI trials, and 17 trials with a mean subject age <60 years [26]. In the pooled analysis of approximately 16,000 women (mean age 55 years) followed for an average of 5.1 years, hormone therapy reduced mortality by 27 percent when compared with placebo (relative risk [RR] 0.73; 95% 0.52-0.96). The absolute reduction in mortality was 0.84 percent (ie, 1 in every 119 women treated with hormone therapy did not die at five years compared with untreated patients).

These data provide additional reassurance that hormone therapy is a safe option for the treatment of symptoms in younger postmenopausal women [27]. (See 'Estimates of risk in women 50 to 59 years' above and "Treatment of menopausal symptoms with hormone therapy".)

CANCER

Breast cancer — In the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI), the risk of invasive breast cancer was significantly increased with combined hormone therapy (HT) at an average follow-up of 5.6 years (hazard ratio [HR] 1.24, unadjusted 95% CI 1.01-1.54) [28]. It has been suggested that the breast cancers that develop in women taking estrogen have a relatively favorable prognosis [29]. However, in the WHI, estrogen-progestin therapy was associated with slightly larger primary cancers at the time of diagnosis and a higher percentage of women with positive lymph nodes when compared with placebo.

In contrast to the results of the combined hormone therapy trial, a trend towards a slightly lower rate of breast cancer risk was seen in the unopposed estrogen trial (HR 0.77 for unopposed estrogen versus placebo, 95% CI 0.59-1.01) [3]. This comparison narrowly missed statistical significance (p = 0.06). Other issues including mammographic density, breast cancer prognosis, use of hormone therapy in breast cancer survivors, and the impact of time since menopause on risk (“gap time”) are all reviewed separately. (See "Postmenopausal hormone therapy and the risk of breast cancer".)

Estimates of the risks and benefits for younger postmenopausal women taking five years of hormone therapy are described above (see 'Estimates of risk in women 50 to 59 years' above).

Ovarian cancer — A nonsignificant increase in the risk of ovarian cancer was observed in the WHI with combined estrogen-progestin therapy (HR 1.6, 95% CI 0.8-3.2; 42 versus 27 cases per 100,000 person-years in the hormone and placebo groups, respectively) [30]. The excess risk was not statistically significant and would be approximately 0.75 cases per 1000 women treated for five years [9].

There were no differences in the distributions of tumor grade, stage, or histology. Because of the small number of ovarian cancer cases and the limited precision in estimating effects in the trial, the authors concluded that these results should not affect a woman's decision to take HT for symptomatic relief.

Observational data, including a meta-analysis of studies (mostly case-control studies) found a small but significant increase in the relative risk of ovarian cancer (relative risk 1.27) in postmenopausal women who had taken estrogen for more than 10 years [31]. Similar results were reported in a second meta-analysis that included studies up until 2007 (eight cohort studies [n = 4715 cases] and 19 case-control studies [n = 8240 cases]) [32].

In one case-control study of 162 matched sets of women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations, postmenopausal hormone therapy did not appear to increase the risk of ovarian cancer; odds ratio with every use of HT was 0.93 (95% CI 0.56-1.56) [33].

We do not consider ovarian cancer to be the major consideration in deciding whether to take short-term hormone therapy for menopausal symptoms because the absolute risk of ovarian cancer with estrogen therapy is small. Other risk factors for ovarian cancer are discussed in detail elsewhere. (See "Treatment of menopausal symptoms with hormone therapy".)

Endometrial hyperplasia and carcinoma — Treatment of postmenopausal women with estrogen alone increases the risk of endometrial hyperplasia and carcinoma [34]. Within one year, endometrial hyperplasia can be demonstrated in 20 to 50 percent of women receiving unopposed estrogen [35,36]. Furthermore, multiple case-control and prospective studies have shown an increased incidence of endometrial carcinoma with long-term unopposed estrogen, with the relative risk ranging from 3.1 to 15 [37-40]. A meta-analysis of clinical trials of hormone therapy and endometrial hyperplasia risk is reviewed separately. (See "Classification and diagnosis of endometrial hyperplasia", section on 'Risk factors'.)

If the absolute risk of endometrial carcinoma in postmenopausal women is about 1 in 1000, then the absolute risk in women taking unopposed estrogen increases to approximately 1 in 100 [37]. While the risk of both localized and widespread endometrial cancer is increased with long-term unopposed estrogen [41], the tumors that develop may be less aggressive, as survival is better in women with cancers associated with estrogen therapy [42].

The risk of endometrial hyperplasia and cancer with unopposed estrogen therapy is both duration- and dose-dependent:

●In one study, the relative risk of endometrial cancer increased by 17 percent per year of estrogen therapy, to an odds ratio of greater than 8 after 10 years [39]. The excess risk persisted five or more years after cessation of therapy.
●In a dose-response study, lower doses of estrogen (esterified estrogens 0.3 mg daily) for two years did not increase the incidence of endometrial hyperplasia compared with no estrogen (1.7 percent in both groups), while doses of 0.625 and 1.25 mg were associated with higher rates of disease, 28 and 53 percent, respectively [42]. However, when a low dose (0.3 mg per day of conjugated equine estrogens) was given for longer than eight years, there was a ninefold increased risk of endometrial cancer [43]. The risk of endometrial hyperplasia was not determined.
Equivalent doses of transdermal and oral estrogen appear to have similar effects on the endometrium. Ultra-low dose transdermal estrogen and placebo result in similarly low rates of endometrial proliferation and endometrial hyperplasia [44].

The risk of endometrial hyperplasia with unopposed estrogen is not reduced by giving it in a cyclic regimen. In one study, for example, in which 25 women were randomly assigned to receive either continuous or cyclic estrogen therapy (without progestin) and followed with serial endometrial biopsies, the incidence of endometrial hyperplasia was almost 50 percent in both groups [36].

Protective effect of progestins — As noted in the WHI, among women treated with estrogen, the excess risk of endometrial hyperplasia and carcinoma can be largely abolished by concurrent therapy with a progestin given in either a cyclic or continuous regimen [30,35,45-47]. In the estrogen-progestin WHI trial, more women in the hormone therapy group required endometrial biopsies to assess vaginal bleeding (33 versus 6 percent for placebo), but there was no significant difference in endometrial cancer risk between the two groups (HR 0.81, 95% CI 0.48-1.36) [30].

In the Postmenopausal Estrogen/Progestin Interventions (PEPI) trial, for example, combined estrogen-progestin therapy led to marked reductions in the incidence of simple (0.8 versus 27.7 percent), complex (0.8 versus 23.7 percent), and atypical hyperplastic (0 versus 11.8 percent) endometrial lesions when compared with unopposed estrogen [46].

In the PEPI trial and in a review from the Cochrane Database, cyclic progestin (when given at least 12 days per month) was as effective as continuous low-dose progestin [5,46]. Shorter duration progestin therapy (<10 to 12 days) may be less protective [5,39,48-51]. (See "Classification and diagnosis of endometrial hyperplasia", section on 'Risk factors'.)

In another report, cyclic monthly users of estrogen-progestin had a higher risk of endometrial cancer than continuous estrogen-progestin users [52].

A commonly used combined continuous estrogen-progestin regimen in the United States is low-dose medroxyprogesterone (2.5 or 5 mg daily) given each day with estrogen (conjugated estrogens 0.625 mg or its equivalent). This regimen is associated with a low risk of endometrial hyperplasia [30,35,53], and has the added advantage of inducing amenorrhea in 60 to 75 percent of women after more than six months of treatment [54,55]. (See "Preparations for postmenopausal hormone therapy".)

Other estrogen-progestin regimens that have been investigated include the following:

●Oral micronized progesterone (200 mg/day for 12 days) reduces the risk of hyperplasia to the same degree as medroxyprogesterone acetate (2.5 mg/day continuously or 10 mg/day for 12 days) [46,56].
●Medroxyprogesterone (10 mg/day) for 14 days every three months may be associated with higher than normal rates of endometrial hyperplasia and cannot be recommended [49,57,58].
●Lower doses of combined estrogen-progestin therapy (conjugated estrogen [0.3 or 0.45 mg/day] with medroxyprogesterone acetate [1.5 or 2.5 mg/day]) also appear to be endometrial protective [59].
●Levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine systems (LNG-IUS) are contraceptive agents that have been used off-label for endometrial protection by some peri- and postmenopausal women taking estrogen. The strategy is to avoid the potential excess risk of cardiovascular disease and breast cancer associated with systemic progestins such as medroxyprogesterone acetate. (See "Preparations for postmenopausal hormone therapy", section on 'Intrauterine device'.)
Endometrial polyps — Limited data suggest that postmenopausal hormone therapy may be associated with an increased risk of endometrial polyps. (See "Endometrial polyps", section on 'Other risk factors'.)

Colorectal cancer — In the WHI, the risk of colorectal cancer was reduced with combined conjugated equine estrogen-medroxyprogesterone acetate (CEE-MPA) use (43 cases versus 72 in the hormone and placebo groups, respectively; HR 0.56, 95% CI 0.38-0.81) (figure 2) [60]. This risk reduction is similar to that seen in epidemiologic studies. In contrast to the results of combined hormone therapy, no significant differences were found in rates of colorectal cancer for unopposed CEE versus placebo use (HR 1.08, 95% CI 0.75-1.55) [3]. This topic is discussed in greater detail separately. (See "Colorectal cancer: Epidemiology, risk factors, and protective factors", section on 'Postmenopausal hormone therapy'.)

Lung cancer — Women on combined estrogen-progestin therapy who developed non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) had a significantly shorter survival compared with those given placebo. (See "Women and lung cancer", section on 'Outcome'.)

COGNITIVE FUNCTION AND DEMENTIA — Although some epidemiologic studies suggested that estrogen may preserve cognitive function and prevent dementia, data from the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) (in women over age 65 years) do not support these observations. The WHI Memory Study (WHIMS), an ancillary study of the WHI, assessed annual cognitive function scores in 4532 postmenopausal women who were over age 65 years and free of probable dementia at baseline.

Both unopposed estrogen and combined estrogen-progestin therapy had no global cognitive benefits in older, non-demented postmenopausal women and led to accelerated cognitive decline. In addition, neither type of hormone therapy prevented dementia in older, non-demented postmenopausal women; to the contrary, it increased risk.

In contrast to the WHI results, some, but not all, epidemiologic studies suggest that women who initiate hormone therapy soon after menopause have a decreased risk of later dementia, while women who start many years after menopause do not. This topic is discussed in detail separately. (See "Estrogen and cognitive function", section on 'Timing of exposure'.)

GALLBLADDER DISEASE — A secondary analysis of data from the WHI found a significantly increased risk of biliary tract disease among women using oral estrogen therapy [61]. Both trials showed a greater risk of any gallbladder disease or surgery in the groups randomized to oral estrogen (hazard ratios [HR] of 1.67 and 1.59 in the estrogen alone and estrogen plus progestin studies, respectively). Women receiving estrogen were more likely to experience an episode of cholecystitis (HR of 1.80 and 1.54, respectively) and were more likely to undergo cholecystectomy (HR of 1.93 and 1.67, respectively).

Similar results were noted in the Heart and Estrogen/progestin Replacement Study (HERS) trial, in which 2763 postmenopausal women with coronary heart disease (CHD) were randomly assigned to combined estrogen-progestin therapy or placebo [62]. After an average follow-up of four years, there was a marginally significant increase in biliary tract surgery in the treatment group (38 percent). The authors calculated that for every 185 women receiving hormone therapy (HT), one additional woman had biliary tract surgery per year. This topic is discussed in detail elsewhere. (See "Epidemiology of and risk factors for gallstones", section on 'Oral contraceptives and estrogen replacement therapy'.)

In one analysis of the WHI, the attributable excess risk of cholecystitis was calculated to be 9.6 and 14.2 additional cases per 1000 women per five years of combined estrogen-progestin therapy or unopposed estrogen use, respectively [9].

OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURE — The risk of osteoporotic fracture with combined hormone therapy versus placebo was reduced at the hip (hazard ratio [HR] 0.67, unadjusted 95% CI 0.47-0.96) and at the vertebrae and wrist (HR 0.65, unadjusted 95% CI 0.46-0.92; and HR 0.71, 95% CI 0.59-0.85, respectively) (figure 3) [63]. Similar risk reductions were seen with unopposed conjugated equine estrogen (CEE) for hip fracture (HR 0.61, 95% CI 0.41-0.91) and vertebral fracture (HR 0.62, 95% CI 0.42-0.93) [3]. (See "Postmenopausal hormone therapy in the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis".)

For women ages 50 to 59 years, the group most likely to be taking hormone therapy, the estimates of benefit in one analysis were 4.9 and 5.9 fewer fractures per 1000 women per five years of combined estrogen-progestin or unopposed estrogen use, respectively [9]. (See 'Estimates of risk in women 50 to 59 years' above.)

TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS — In a post-hoc analysis from the Heart and Estrogen/progestin Replacement Study (HERS) trial, a secondary prevention of coronary heart disease (CHD) study, 734 of 2783 women were diabetic at baseline; the remaining 2029 women (who were normoglycemic or had impaired glucose tolerance) were followed for the development of type 2 diabetes for an average of four years [64]. Results of the trial were as follows:

●The cumulative incidence of type 2 diabetes was 6.2 percent in the HT group compared with 9.5 percent in the placebo group (relative hazard [RH] 0.65; 95% CI 0.48-0.89).
●Results were still significant after adjustment for variables such as body mass index, weight change, and waist circumference.
●The number needed to treat to prevent one case of diabetes was 30 (CI 18-103).
Similar results were reported in the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) combined estrogen-progestin trial in which fasting glucose and insulin were measured in a random sample at baseline and at one and three years. After a mean follow-up of 5.6 years the following results were seen [65]:

●The cumulative incidence of treated diabetes was 3.5 percent in the hormone group and 4.2 percent in the placebo group (HR 0.79, 95% CI 0.7-0.9). There was little change in the hazard ratio after adjustment for changes in BMI and waist circumference.
●Changes in fasting glucose and insulin during the first year of follow-up suggested a decrease in insulin resistance in the hormone group.
Thus, combined HT appears to reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus, possibly mediated by a decrease in insulin resistance unrelated to body size. However, this effect is insufficient to recommend HT as a diabetes prevention strategy in women with CHD.

For women ages 50 to 59 years, the group most likely to be taking hormone therapy, the estimate of benefit in one analysis was 11 fewer cases per 1000 per five years of use (for estrogen plus progestin [E+P] and estrogen [E] use combined) [9]. (See 'Estimates of risk in women 50 to 59 years' above.)

OTHER POSSIBLE BENEFITS

Recurrent urinary tract infection — Estrogen therapy, in particular, vaginal estrogen, is effective for the symptoms of vaginal atrophy (see "Treatment of vaginal atrophy", section on 'Vaginal estrogen therapy'). Estrogen may also be beneficial for reducing the frequency of recurrent urinary tract infections in postmenopausal women, but the effect appears to be specific to vaginal estrogen, as illustrated by the following studies:

●A randomized, controlled trial found that vaginal estrogen decreased the risk of recurrence in patients with frequent urinary tract infections (0.5 versus 5.9 episodes per patient-year) (figure 4) [66]. This benefit may be due to normalization of the vaginal flora since the patients treated with estrogen cream had an increase in the prevalence of lactobacilli and decrease in E. coli vaginal colonization.
●In a meta-analysis of five estrogen trials (three using the vaginal route of administration and two using the oral route) in 334 postmenopausal women, estrogen therapy significantly reduced the rate of urinary tract infection when compared with placebo [67]. However, when the trials of oral and vaginal estrogen were analyzed separately, vaginal estrogen was beneficial, while oral estrogen was not.
●In the Heart and Estrogen/progestin Replacement Study (HERS), a four-year study of 2763 postmenopausal women, the frequency of urinary tract infections was not decreased in those receiving oral estrogen-progestin therapy compared with placebo [68].
In summary, there is some evidence that vaginal, but not systemic, estrogen therapy may reduce the frequency of recurrent urinary tract infections in postmenopausal women. It has been suggested that vaginal estrogen may be reasonable in postmenopausal women not taking oral estrogen who have three or more recurrent urinary tract infections per year, particularly when antimicrobial resistance to multiple drugs limits the efficacy of antimicrobial prophylaxis [69]. (See "Recurrent urinary tract infection in women".)

Health-related quality of life — Estrogen has a variable effect on quality of life in postmenopausal women, depending on the woman's age and the presence of symptoms and/or comorbid conditions. In postmenopausal women with vasomotor flushes, estrogen appears to improve quality of life [70,71].

In the HERS trial, the majority of women did not have vasomotor symptoms at baseline (84.3 percent). In this group, there were greater declines in physical function and energy with estrogen therapy than placebo, while there were no changes in mental health or depressive symptoms in either group. In contrast, in the women with symptoms at baseline, estrogen improved mental health and reduced depressive symptoms, with no effect on physical function or energy level [72,73].

It is possible that the decline in physical function in the asymptomatic group could be due to the increased rates of cardiovascular events in the first two years of the study. In a second study of elderly women, three years of estrogen therapy, with or without progestin, did not prevent the normal age-related decline in physical functioning [74].

In the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) (an older, asymptomatic population), no significant improvements were seen in quality of life measures (including general health, vitality, mental health, depressive symptoms, and sexual satisfaction) [75]. The WHI was not designed to examine the effects of hormone therapy (HT) on vasomotor flushes or other menopausal symptoms. However, 12 percent of the study population did have significant symptoms. In these younger women, HT relieved vasomotor flushes and improved sleep, but did not otherwise improve quality of life. In the unopposed estrogen trial, women with moderate-to-severe vasomotor symptoms at baseline experienced significant improvement in vasomotor flushes when compared with placebo [76]. In the group as a whole, a minimal improvement in sleep disturbance symptoms was seen, but there were no differences in other quality of life measures (physical and social functioning, vitality, bodily pain, depressive symptoms, and sexual satisfaction) between the estrogen and placebo groups.

Falls — Problems with balance may play a major role in the incidence of forearm fractures in postmenopausal women [77]. The incidence of Colles' fractures increases markedly in women at age 50 years but remains stable in men up to the age of 80 years. A mechanism other than osteoporosis must be invoked to explain this observation because osteoporosis occurs gradually [78]. The fracture is usually caused by falling on an outstretched hand.

Estrogen therapy may improve balance and reduce the tendency to fall, a change that could contribute to the associated decrease in fracture risk. Some studies have noted an improvement in balance with estrogen therapy [79], while others have not [80,81]. In one study of 19 postmenopausal women with vasomotor symptoms, for example, dynamic posturography revealed that the women had improved balance during treatment with estrogen [79]. (See "Postmenopausal hormone therapy in the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis".)

Skin — Estrogen is widely thought to preserve the thickness and the collagen content of skin in postmenopausal women [82-85], but clinical trial data to support this concept are lacking. In a single-blinded cross-sectional analysis of nine long-term HT users and 11 nonusers, the HT users had more elastic skin and less severe wrinkling [86]. In contrast, a seven-month trial of estrogen-progestin therapy versus placebo in 40 postmenopausal women reported that skin elasticity and thickness were significantly improved in the HT group when compared with baseline, but there were no differences between the HT and placebo groups [87]. A second six-month randomized trial in 485 women also found no differences between hormone therapy and placebo on age-related skin changes [88].

Although some epidemiologic studies have suggested that postmenopausal hormone therapy is associated with an increased risk of melanoma [89,90], no excess risk of either melanoma or nonmelanoma skin cancer was observed in a post-hoc analysis of the Women’s Health Initiative (for unopposed estrogen or combined estrogen-progestin therapy) [91].

Eyes — The risk of cataract formation appears to be decreased by long-term estrogen therapy. In the Framingham Heart Study, postmenopausal women who had taken estrogen for 10 years or longer had a 60 percent reduction in risk of nuclear lens opacities compared with control women (odds ratio 0.4; 95% CI 0.2-1.01) [92]. In a second study, subcapsular as well as nuclear opacities were decreased by 70 and 80 percent, respectively, in women taking estrogen [93]. (See "Cataract in adults".)

Postmenopausal hormone therapy may also reduce intraocular pressure [94,95] and lower the risk of primary open-angle glaucoma [96], but the absolute reduction in risk is small. In a retrospective analysis of claims data from women over age 50 years, the calculated absolute risks of developing primary open-angle glaucoma (after adjusting for age, ethnicity, and ocular comorbidities) for women taking four years of unopposed estrogen, combined estrogen-progestin, or no hormone therapy were 1.6, 1.7, and 2.1 percent, respectively. We do not consider this small reduction in glaucoma risk to be an important consideration in deciding whether to recommend short-term hormone therapy for menopausal symptoms.

Other — It has been thought that estrogen may reduce the risk of osteoarthritis. In a cross-sectional study of over 4000 women, those receiving long-term estrogen therapy (≥10 years) had a 40 percent lower risk of hip osteoarthritis than those who had not received estrogen [97]. Similar results were found in a prospective analysis of the Framingham cohort [98]. In the Women’s Health Initiative, women who took unopposed estrogen had lower rates of subsequent arthroplasty when compared with those taking placebo [99].

In addition, estrogen preserves teeth [100,101]; the relative risk for edentia was only 0.6 in postmenopausal women taking estrogen as compared with those who did not, perhaps related to less osteoporosis of the jaw [100].

OTHER POSSIBLE RISKS — Estrogen therapy may be associated with increases in the incidence of gallbladder disease, bronchospasm, ovarian cancer, systemic lupus erythematosus, and the Raynaud phenomenon. The data are insufficient for epilepsy.

Urinary incontinence — Estrogen may alleviate dyspareunia, recurrent cystitis, and vaginal/urethral atrophy and inflammation in postmenopausal women. However, both the Heart and Estrogen/progestin Replacement Study (HERS) and Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) trials have reported that oral hormone therapy (HT) worsens incontinence. Thus, oral estrogen with or without progestin should not be prescribed for this indication. Of note, extremely low doses of unopposed transdermal estrogen (0.014 mg/day) do not appear to increase the risk of urinary incontinence [102]. (See "Treatment and prevention of urinary incontinence in women", section on 'Other medications'.)

The use of topical vaginal estrogen therapy for urogenital atrophy symptoms is discussed separately. (See "Treatment of vaginal atrophy".)

Bronchospasm — Estrogen therapy may be associated with the onset of asthma. In the Nurses' Health Study, for example, the relative risk of new-onset asthma in 36,094 postmenopausal women followed for 10 years was significantly greater in women taking estrogen as compared with those who were not (relative risk 1.5) [103]. This increased risk was dose-related; it was statistically significant only at a dose greater than 0.625 mg/day of conjugated estrogens, probably because of the small numbers of women studied.

Data are conflicting on whether estrogen therapy in postmenopausal asthmatic women causes a worsening of airway function. In one study of 15 postmenopausal women with mild to moderate asthma, the estrogen-treated women had subclinical worsening of disease activity (as measured by peak expiratory flow and spirometry) [104]. In contrast, in a second study of 20 postmenopausal asthmatic women there were no differences in measures of airway obstruction after stopping and restarting estrogen therapy [105].

Thus, while estrogen is not contraindicated in women with obstructive lung disease, clinicians should be aware of the possibility of worsening bronchospasm. Furthermore, estrogen may be considered as an etiologic factor in women who develop asthma during therapy.

Systemic lupus erythematosus — Estrogen appears to increase the risk of developing systemic lupus erythematosus [106]. A report from the Nurses' Health Study found a relative risk of 2.5 for current estrogen therapy and a nonsignificant risk of 1.8 for past estrogen therapy compared with women who had never received estrogen [107]. The risk was related to the duration of estrogen therapy. (See "Epidemiology and pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus".)

Postmenopausal estrogen use may increase the risk of flare in women with established lupus, but these flares tend to be mild-to-moderate, not severe. This is discussed in detail elsewhere. (See "Menstrual function, menopause, and hormonal contraceptives in women with systemic lupus erythematosus", section on 'Menopause'.)

Uterine leiomyomas — Use of postmenopausal hormone therapy in the post-reproductive years may cause some women with leiomyomas to continue to have symptoms after menopause. The risk of symptoms may depend, in part, on the location of the fibroid (higher if submucosal [108]) and type of estrogen preparation (higher with transdermal estrogen in some studies [109,110] but not others [111]).

A systematic review including five randomized controlled trials found that postmenopausal hormone therapy caused myoma growth, but this typically occurred without clinical symptoms [112]. These findings were confirmed in a subsequent prospective study [113]. Thus, presence of leiomyomas is not a contraindication to postmenopausal hormone therapy nor associated with new symptomatic fibroids in most women.

Epilepsy — In a report of 42 menopausal women with epilepsy, HT was associated with an increase in seizure frequency [114]. Although these data are not sufficient to recommend that women with seizures not be offered HT, the indications for hormone replacement have diminished substantially since publication of the WHI. Women with seizures who are treated should be monitored carefully.

Dry eye syndrome — A large observational study demonstrated an increased risk of dry eye syndrome in postmenopausal women on unopposed estrogen or combined estrogen-progestin therapy compared with nonusers (relative risk [RR] 1.69 and 1.29; 95% CI 1.49-1.91 and 1.13-1.48, respectively) [115]. This may reflect an effect of estrogen on the tear film. (See "Dry eyes".)

Nephrolithiasis — Menopause may increase urinary calcium excretion, an important risk factor for the development of calcium-containing kidney stones [116]. However, the magnitude of the increase is still unclear. In contrast, exogenous estrogen therapy may decrease urinary calcium excretion. Although one might anticipate an increased risk of nephrolithiasis with menopause and a decreased risk with estrogen therapy, data that address this question have been inconsistent:

●In the Nurses’ Health Study, a prospective cohort study, natural menopause was not associated with an increased risk of nephrolithiasis [117]. In addition, postmenopausal estrogen users, when compared with nonusers, did not have a lower risk of nephrolithiasis.
●Data from the WHI, the only randomized trial to address this question, suggest that estrogen therapy may increase the risk of nephrolithiasis [118]. In a post-hoc analysis of the two hormone therapy trials, kidney stone data was obtained by patient self-report. After adjusting for age, body mass index, prior hormone therapy, use of coffee or thiazide diuretics, there was a small excess risk of kidney stones in the hormone groups compared with placebo (39 versus 34/10,000 person years; hazard ratio 1.21).
The reasons for these discrepant findings are unclear. However, the incidence rates of kidney stones in the WHI were nearly three times higher than in the Nurses’ Health Study (which included only cases with symptomatic stones) [117]. In addition, women taking estrogen were more likely to develop gallstones [61], and imaging studies to evaluate the gallbladder would identify asymptomatic kidney stones. Given the small absolute risk reported in this study (five additional cases per 10,000 person years), we do not consider nephrolithiasis to be a major consideration in deciding whether to take short-term hormone therapy for menopausal symptoms. (See 'Gallbladder disease' above.)

OTHER ISSUES

Weight — Although women are often concerned that taking postmenopausal hormone therapy will exacerbate the weight gain that occurs in midlife, a meta-analysis of 28 trials in 28,559 women found no evidence of an effect of unopposed oestrogen or combined oestrogen-progestin on body weight or body mass index [119].

Women with primary ovarian insufficiency (premature ovarian failure) — Data from the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) should not be extrapolated to women with primary ovarian insufficiency (premature ovarian failure; menopause before age 40 years) in whom postmenopausal hormone therapy is generally initiated at a younger age. In otherwise healthy women with primary ovarian insufficiency, we continue their postmenopausal hormone therapy until the average age of menopause, approximately age 50 to 51 years. At that point, the same discussion of potential risks and benefits of postmenopausal hormone therapy should take place.

Androgen therapy — The use of exogenous androgen therapy in peri- and postmenopausal women is reviewed separately. (See "Androgen production and therapy in women" and "Sexual dysfunction in women: Management", section on 'Androgens'.)

EXPERT GROUPS — Most expert groups agree that hormone therapy is indicated for the management of menopausal symptoms, but not for the primary or secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease or dementia [7,120-122]. Some groups suggest that hormone therapy may be reasonable for women with osteoporosis who cannot take non-estrogen therapies [5,120].

INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS — UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, “The Basics” and “Beyond the Basics.” The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5th to 6th grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10th to 12th grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.

Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles on a variety of subjects by searching on “patient info” and the keyword(s) of interest.)

●Basics topics (see "Patient information: Menopause (The Basics)")
●Beyond the Basics topics (see "Patient information: Menopause (Beyond the Basics)" and "Patient information: Postmenopausal hormone therapy (Beyond the Basics)" and "Patient information: Nonhormonal treatments for menopausal symptoms (Beyond the Basics)" and "Patient information: Vaginal dryness (Beyond the Basics)")
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

●For postmenopausal women with moderate-to-severe vasomotor symptoms (and no history of breast cancer or cardiovascular disease), we suggest estrogen-progestin therapy (or unopposed estrogen for those post-hysterectomy) (Grade 2B). For women with vaginal atrophy symptoms only, we suggest vaginal estrogen (Grade 2B). (See "Treatment of menopausal symptoms with hormone therapy", section on 'Candidates/indications' and "Treatment of vaginal atrophy", section on 'Vaginal estrogen therapy'.)
●Postmenopausal hormone therapy is effective for the treatment of menopausal hot flashes and vaginal atrophy caused by hypoestrogenism. However, it is currently not recommended for the prevention of chronic disease such as prevention of cardiovascular or bone disease. (See 'Overview' above.)
●In the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) combined hormone therapy trial, risks included coronary heart disease (CHD) events, stroke, venous thromboembolism (VTE), and breast cancer, while benefits included a reduction of fracture and colorectal cancer risk. Results for stroke, VTE, and fracture risk with unopposed conjugated equine estrogen (CEE) were similar to those in the combined therapy trial. (See 'Overview' above.)
●In contrast, no increase in either CHD or breast cancer risk was seen with unopposed estrogen use (in fact, a possible reduction in breast cancer risk was observed). The discrepancies in CHD and breast cancer risk between the WHI unopposed estrogen trial and the combined estrogen-progestin trial suggest that the progestin played an important role in the increased CHD and breast cancer risk seen with combined therapy. (See 'Overview' above.)
●Subsequent analyses suggest that the risk of CHD appears to depend upon the timing of exposure, with no excess risk observed in younger menopausal women. In addition, mortality rates appear to be lower in young postmenopausal hormone users compared with nonusers. Thus, for young, symptomatic postmenopausal women, short-term hormone therapy is considered to be a reasonable option (figure 1). (See "Postmenopausal hormone therapy and cardiovascular risk", section on 'Timing of exposure'.)
●The risk of endometrial hyperplasia and other possible risks and benefits of postmenopausal hormone therapy are reviewed above. (See 'Endometrial hyperplasia and carcinoma' above and 'Other possible benefits' above and 'Other possible risks' above.)
●Recommendations for postmenopausal hormone therapy use are reviewed elsewhere. (See "Treatment of menopausal symptoms with hormone therapy".)
●Estimates of risk for women in their 50s taking five years of hormone therapy are described above. (See 'Estimates of risk in women 50 to 59 years' above.)