Routine comprehensive care for children with sickle cell disease
INTRODUCTION — The remarkable progress in the care of children with sickle cell disease (SCD) over the past several decades is directly attributable to the evolution of a standard of anticipatory guidance offered to families of affected children by most pediatric hematologists [1]. Although there is a paucity of formal evidence-based standards of care, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) have convened an expert panel to develop evidence-based guidelines to supplement their decade-old monograph that has been the standard for SCD care [2]. This topic review represents a synthesis of the standards promoted by various professional societies [3-5], by state and regional guideline efforts [6], and by more recent attempts to define quality care [7].
Each location at which clinical care is provided to children with SCD will have a different approach of how to implement the policies and patient education goals outlined below. Many providers use a roadmap or outline of care that is signed off at each visit or when a milestone is reached. In addition, formal assessment of these elements of care may serve as the basis for a quality improvement project [7-9]. However it is executed, it is beneficial to develop an outline of care that can be used to verify that planned educational and screening maneuvers have occurred.
The key elements of routine care and anticipatory guidance for a child with SCD are outlined here. Overviews of other aspects of the evaluation and management of SCD are discussed in separate topic reviews:
●(See "Diagnosis of sickle cell disorders".)
●(See "Overview of the clinical manifestations of sickle cell disease".)
●(See "Overview of the management and prognosis of sickle cell disease".)
●(See "Management of fever in sickle cell disease".)
Detailed discussion of specific complications, such as acute chest syndrome, painful crises, and cerebrovascular events, can be accessed through these overview topics or through a specific search of the UpToDate database.
NEWBORN SCREENING FOLLOW-UP — The availability of universal newborn screening for hemoglobinopathies in the United States and the United Kingdom offers the unparalleled opportunity to identify ALL children with clinically significant sickle cell diseases (SCD) in the newborn period.
First visit with a sickle cell disease clinician — Infants with SCD should be promptly referred for consultation with clinicians experienced in SCD. The SCD clinician or team will provide SCD-specific anticipatory guidance about common early childhood issues, will teach the family to evaluate for complications that require urgent treatment, will develop strategies to provide requisite urgent care when complications do arise, and will determine the necessity for prophylactic penicillin. Depending upon local resources, the SCD clinician may be a pediatric hematologist (often within a specialized SCD program) or may be a knowledgeable general pediatrician or family physician. The following are essential elements of the first visit with an experienced SCD clinician:
Timing — The timing of the first visit with the experienced SCD clinician depends upon the hemoglobinopathy. For patients with hemoglobin SS (HbSS) or hemoglobin S-β0 thalassemia (HbS-β0 thalassemia), the first visit should be before eight weeks of age. For those with hemoglobin SC (HbSC), hemoglobin S-β+ thalassemia (HbS-β+thalassemia), and other sickle cell syndromes, the first visit can be delayed until 12 to 16 weeks of age, if necessary.
Laboratory testing
●Confirmation of exact diagnosis — The confirmation of an exact diagnosis will depend upon the newborn screening program’s services. At least two separate blood tests, including the immediate newborn sample, should be used to confirm that this child is the one with the abnormal hemoglobin. Confirmatory testing is performed using hemoglobin electrophoresis and/or a deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)-based test to confirm the type of SCD. As an example, a DNA-based test may be required to distinguish between the “FS” pattern seen on electrophoresis in the newborn with either HbSS or HbS-β0 thalassemia. (See "Diagnosis of sickle cell disorders".)
●Complete blood count and reticulocyte count — A complete blood count, with reticulocyte count, should be performed at the first visit and at each subsequent visit to establish baseline values for the individual patient. The results should be interpreted in view of the physiologic decline of hemoglobin in infants, with a nadir between six to nine weeks of age. Premature infants may have an earlier and more profound physiologic anemia.
Medication
Prophylactic penicillin — Penicillin VK (125 mg twice daily) should be prescribed for all children diagnosed with HbSS and HbS-β0 thalassemia, beginning by two months of age [10-12]. Other sickle cell syndromes may not require this prophylaxis due to the lower risk of functional asplenia or onset at a later age. Liquid penicillin will need to be refilled every 14 days, which can be inconvenient and costly for the family. Therefore, some clinicians suggest using half of a penicillin VK 250 mg tablet, dissolved in a small amount of formula.
The PROPS II Study could not demonstrate a benefit to continuing prophylactic penicillin after age five once the second dose of pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine(PPSV23) was given three years after the first [13]. However, new recommendations are that the PPSV 23 be given at or after two years of age and then repeated five years later, thus raising a question about the correct approach. At this time, it is reasonable to continue twice daily prophylactic penicillin until the child has received two doses of PPSV23. (See "Overview of the management and prognosis of sickle cell disease", section on 'Prophylactic penicillin' and "Management of fever in sickle cell disease", section on 'Management in variant sickle cell syndromes'.)
Folic acid — Although 400 mcg to 1 mg daily is often recommended for children with HbSS and HbS-β0 thalassemia, there are no convincing data that this is required. Formula-fed infants in particular receive adequate folic acid in their diet.
Education and anticipatory guidance — Education of the child’s parents or caregivers about the routine and emergency complications of SCD is a cornerstone of effective medical care. Each of the following areas should be covered in the initial visit and should also be reviewed during each follow-up visit to reinforce the information and to ensure understanding.
Inheritance pattern and genetic risk — The clinician should inform the parents that they each carry an abnormal hemoglobin gene, and that there is a 25 percent recurrence risk of another child with SCD for the couple with each pregnancy. Each parent should be encouraged to share the information about their trait status with any subsequent partner, so that all couples will know if there is the risk of an affected child with any subsequent pregnancy and will be able to make an informed decision about whether to take on this risk before another child is conceived. (See "Sickle cell trait".)
Splenic palpation — The family should be educated about the risk of splenic enlargement, termed splenic sequestration, which may lead acutely to severe life-threatening anemia. Eventually, because of infarction, this process may lead to splenic hypofunction and to functional asplenia, placing the child at risk for overwhelming infection with encapsulated organisms. The risk for acute splenic sequestration crisis is highest in infants and young children (up to age three years) with HbSS or HbS-β0thalassemia. Children with HbSC also develop splenic sequestration, but typically this occurs at an older age and usually is not an acute clinical problem because of the higher baseline hemoglobin in HbSC. (See "Overview of the clinical manifestations of sickle cell disease", section on 'Reduced or absent splenic function' and "Overview of the clinical manifestations of sickle cell disease", section on 'Splenic sequestration crisis'.)
The family should be taught to palpate the spleen at least daily when the child is well and more often when the child is ill. If the spleen is felt to be enlarged by the parent, the child should be examined by a clinician to confirm enlargement of the spleen, and a blood count should be obtained and compared with the steady state value to determine if transfusion is required.
Fever plan — All caregivers should be educated that a fever over 101.5°F (38.5°C) requires urgent medical attention, even if the fever immediately comes down with or without antipyretics. The exact degree of fever elevation may be based upon the patient’s age and clinical characteristics, as well as local preference. However, generally, a temperature between 101°F and 102°F (38°C and 39°C) is selected, and a medical evaluation is recommended within four hours after fever onset. A specific plan should be made for where the family should bring the child with SCD when he or she develops a fever, in consultation with the primary care physician. Options include the primary care physician’s office, a local emergency department (ED), or a tertiary pediatric hospital ED or clinic [6]. (See "Management of fever in sickle cell disease".)
How to contact the sickle cell specialist — Expert care should be available to the family of a child with SCD whenever needed. Contact information should be provided in writing to the family, for use when calling with follow-up questions or with new problems or when a complication such as fever develops that requires urgent medical evaluation. At a minimum, the family should be given contact information to allow for after-hours telephone consultation by generalist practitioners and emergency physicians who are seeing the patient when they are having a problem.
ADDITIONAL EDUCATION — The following issues may be introduced during the first visit. However, detailed discussion may be delayed until later in the first year, to avoid overwhelming parents and caregivers at the first visit. Once introduced, these issues should be reviewed and reinforced at each subsequent follow-up visit.
In particular, the caregivers must have a clear understanding of symptoms requiring urgent evaluation, and they must have an action plan (table 1). These medical issues can be introduced gradually, as appropriate to the child’s age.
Painful crises or events — The parents or caretakers should be educated about management of painful crises before the infant is four or five months old. Pain is the hallmark and the most feared complication in all forms of sickle cell disease (SCD). Discussions should emphasize that pain should be recognized and treated promptly, and this point should be reiterated at subsequent visits. Specifically, teaching should include:
●Recognition of pain
•Early symptoms of a painful crisis in a young child often include decreased activity (or lying quietly). Symmetric or asymmetric swelling may develop in the dorsum of the hands or feet, also called dactylitis or hand-foot syndrome. The pain may not be accompanied by crying.
•The school-aged child in the early stages of a painful crisis either may be uninterested in usual activities or may try to ignore the pain. If the pain is not recognized and treated, it may progress to overwhelming pain which is difficult to control. Therefore, the child should be encouraged to tell a trusted adult when he or she feels pain. The adult should be aware of the need for early treatment and should be educated about the different methods available to treat pain.
•Older children and adolescents will experience pain in many ways. During office visits, the child should be engaged in discussing how to avoid triggers for their pain and how they can manage their pain at home.
●Management of pain — Details of pain management are discussed in separate topic reviews. (See "Acute pain management in adults with sickle cell disease" and"Evaluation and management of pain in children".)

Key points to communicate to the parents or caretakers are:
•Nonpharmacologic measures should be used in addition to pharmacologic treatments of pain. These include distraction, reading or being read to, soft music, or other activities to induce relaxation.
•Fluids by mouth should be increased to twice maintenance volumes. The clinician should calculate this volume and should communicate the target volume to the family.
•Avoid being chilled. Encourage a shower or brief bath; massage or rub the affected area, as tolerated.
•Mild pain in young children may be managed with oral ibuprofen in therapeutic doses (usually 10 mg/kg/dose every four hours) as needed.
•For moderate pain, oral opioids (acetaminophen with codeine [1 mg/kg/dose of the codeine component] every four hours is the usual starting dose, escalating to higher doses of codeine, hydrocodone, or equivalent). This oral opioid can be alternated with the ibuprofen, so that some medication can be given every two hours. Medications and doses should be discussed in advance of need, and the family should be prescribed medication at scheduled visits to have at home, to be used for treatment of subsequent painful events.
•The caretakers should be informed that constipation is a common side effect of effective pain medication (opioid and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs [NSAID]), and the clinician should develop a plan for management.
•If the home measures described above do not relieve the pain enough to allow the child to rest, the child should present for urgent medical evaluation.
Acute chest syndrome — The parents or caretakers should be educated about acute chest syndrome before the infant is six to nine months old. Families should be warned that acute chest syndrome is a peculiar complication of SCD that resembles pneumonia in another child. It may progress quickly, may result in involvement of multiple blood pulmonary blood vessels and airspaces, and can be life-threatening throughout the lifespan. They should be aware that it usually requires inpatient observation and parenteral antibiotics at least for initial management [8].
Key points to communicate to the family include:
●Any shortness of breath or trouble breathing should result in an emergency room visit, just like with fever.
●Asthma is both a promoter and consequence of acute chest syndrome episodes. Therefore, it is essential to promptly recognize and to vigorously manage any asthma symptoms, including diligent use of preventer medications when indicated [14,15]. A plan should be made for ongoing management of asthma either by the primary care physician or by an asthma specialist.
●Exposure to environmental tobacco smoke increases risks for asthma and acute chest syndrome. All household members that smoke should be strongly encouraged to quit and should be guided to smoking cessation resources. (See "Overview of smoking cessation management in adults".)
A detailed discussion of acute chest syndrome is presented in a separate topic review. (See "The acute chest syndrome in children and adolescents with sickle cell disease".)
Stroke — For infants with HbSS or HbS-β0 thalassemia, the parents or caretakers should be educated about stroke risk before the infant is nine months old [16].
Key points to communicate to the family include:
●Approximately 1 in 10 children with HbSS disease experience thrombotic stroke by age 18. Warning signs of stroke include not moving a side of the face, arm, or leg, in the absence of pain. These stroke symptoms are observed in all age groups starting in early infancy. In adolescents, signs of hemorrhagic stroke include a severe headache.
●Transcranial Doppler (TCD) is an important method to screen for stroke risk [17]. Elevated TCD velocities identify children at higher than standard risk. Persistently elevated TCD velocities indicate the need for interventions to prevent stroke, such as chronic transfusion. The first TCD examination should be scheduled soon after the child’s second birthday.
A detailed discussion of stroke in SCD is presented in a separate topic review. (See "Cerebrovascular complications of sickle cell disease".)
Priapism — For male patients, the parents or caretakers should be educated about priapism before the infant is five years old (and ideally earlier). This is particularly important in boys with HbSS and HbS-β0 thalassemia. Up to 80 percent of males with sickle cell anemia will experience priapism by age 18, and prolonged priapism (erection lasting longer than four hours) has been reported before five years of age [18]. (See "Diagnosis and management of priapism in sickle cell disease".)
Key points to communicate to the family include:
●Priapism is a painful erection. Like other painful events in SCD, it is caused by sickled cells.
●There are two patterns of priapism:
•Stuttering — These are brief episodes of priapism that may occur daily. Stuttering priapism and its management strategies can be addressed during regularly scheduled visits with the SCD clinician.
•Prolonged — These are episodes of priapism lasting over four hours, and they may result in penile ischemia and in permanent damage [19]. A patient with an episode of prolonged priapism should seek immediate medical attention to minimize the chance of permanent vascular damage to the penis, which may lead to impotence [20].
Hydroxyurea, chronic transfusion, and stem cell transplantation — These three therapies are important options for all individuals with SCD. They should be discussed with every family and patient at appropriate times in the disease course. A synopsis of current thinking follows.
●Hydroxyurea — This oral chemotherapy medication, when given chronically in low doses, will decrease the frequency and severity of painful events and of acute chest syndrome episodes, and it may perhaps reduce the risk of organ damage caused by SCD. The results of two studies (HUSOFT [21] and BABY HUG [22]) suggest that hydroxyurea may be given safely to children as young as eight months of age, although it is not approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for this age group. The benefits of hydroxyurea do not continue after the medication is stopped. Since the risk-to-benefit ratio of hydroxyurea or related decision-making may change as the child grows, its use should be discussed in early childhood, throughout the school years, and in adolescence and adulthood [23]. (See "Hydroxyurea and other disease-modifying therapies in sickle cell disease", section on 'Use of hydroxyurea'.)
●Chronic transfusion — Chronic transfusion consists of transfusion of packed red blood cells (PRBC) monthly (or at least 8 to 10 times a year), with a goal of reducing and maintaining the percentage of sickle hemoglobin to below 30 percent. This treatment decreases sickle cell complications; it is the strategy used to decrease the likelihood of primary and recurrent stroke. A major limitation of this therapy is iron overload, which requires chelation to prevent organ damage [24]. (See "Overview of the management and prognosis of sickle cell disease", section on 'Transfusion therapy'.)
●Stem cell transplantation — Stem cell transplantation (also known as hematopoietic cell transplantation [HCT]) is a curative treatment for SCD that has been available since the 1990s. However, the risk of death and sterility from the procedure has limited its use. At the present time, stem cell transplantation from a sibling donor of either bone marrow or cord blood is a standard therapy available to cure SCD. (See "Hematopoietic cell transplantation in sickle cell disease".)

For children that do not have an HLA-matched sibling available as a donor, the risks of stem cell transplantation are considerably higher, and the likelihood of successful engraftment is lower. Unrelated donor bone marrow transplantation is under active research investigation. Unrelated donor cord blood transplantation has rarely been successful.
FOLLOW-UP VISITS WITH A SICKLE CELL DISEASE EXPERT CLINICIAN — The optimal interval of follow-up with an experienced sickle cell disease (SCD) clinician is an individualized decision based upon SCD type, family needs, other medical conditions, distance from expert care, and insurance requirements. However, we suggest a minimum of a 20- to 30-minute visit at the intervals indicated below, reserved for anticipatory guidance concerning issues specific to SCD and for verification of disease-specific immunization needs. This series of visits should be in addition to those needed for general pediatric primary care.
If primary care is provided outside of the specialized SCD program, the SCD specialist should administer or inform the family and primary care provider about disease-specific vaccine requirements, which are outlined below.
Routine monitoring at all visits — The following are essential elements of all visits to the SCD clinician:
●A complete blood count and reticulocyte count should be done at each SCD-specific visit (at a minimum annually), and a copy of the results should be given to the family. The family should be asked to bring this information if the child presents to an outside institution for an acute problem (eg, a crisis), for comparison.
●Height, weight, and head circumference should be measured, plotted on growth curves, and compared with prior values. Some decrement of growth often occurs between 6 and 24 months of age, corresponding to the decline in hemoglobin associated with increased beta chain synthesis. However, the subsequent rate of growth should be normal. This growth velocity data will be vital in assessment of pubertal delays or of short stature and in related treatment decisions [25].
●Vital signs including blood pressure [26] should be measured at each visit. Because of the high rate of idiopathic hypertension in the African-American community, increasing attention has been placed on the diagnosis and management of elevated blood pressures in childhood. Hypertension noted during painful crisis is attributed to the pain. However, careful review of blood pressure values measured during routine visits will provide early clues about hypertension, especially since the lower hemoglobin values in most patients with SCD should result in blood pressures that are lower than expected for age.
●Room air oxygen saturation should be recorded at least annually, using a transcutaneous oxygen (TcO2) sensor. TcO2 saturations are generally lower in children with SCD compared with healthy children. Therefore, it is important to have serial measurements of each child’s baseline value when healthy, to be used for comparison when the child presents with an acute issue, such as a painful crisis or possible acute chest syndrome.
●Extended red blood cell antigen typing, at least for the Rh complex (CcDEe) and Kell antigens, should be considered in all patients with HbSS disease at a clinic visit in early childhood, in anticipation of a high likelihood of transfusion during childhood. Alternatively, some institutions offer strategies to perform this typing rapidly when transfusion is needed [24].
Additional age-specific tasks
Zero to two years
●Intervals for visits
•HbSS and HbS-β0 thalassemia: Every three to four months
•HbSC and HbS-β+ thalassemia: Every four to five months
●Penicillin prophylaxis — For children treated with penicillin prophylaxis, the dose in this age group is 125 mg twice daily. Penicillin prophylaxis is indicated for those with HbSS and HbS-β0 thalassemia and is often used for children with other types of SCD. Prophylaxis should be started by two months of age. (See 'Prophylactic penicillin'above.)
●Immunizations — Administer the pneumococcal conjugate vaccine series (eg, PCV13, four doses), Haemophilus influenzae type b series (Hib), and age appropriate doses of annual inactivated influenza vaccine [27]. These immunizations are also part of the routine childhood immunization schedule but are particularly important for children with SCD because of the risk of complications if an asplenic individual contracts these infections. (See "Standard immunizations for children and adolescents"and "Prevention of sepsis in the asplenic patient", section on 'Children'.)

As of January 2013, a combination conjugate vaccine against Hib and meningococcus (HibMenCY) is recommended for infants with SCD, replacing the standard Hib vaccine [28]. A four-dose series of HibMenCY is recommended, at 2, 4, 6, and 12 to 15 months of age (table 2). (See "Meningococcal vaccines", section on 'In infants and toddlers'.)
●Caregiver education — Highlight issues of identification and management of painful crises, fever plan, spleen palpation, penicillin prophylaxis (in children with HbSS and HbS-β0 thalassemia), growth, development, and results of blood counts. Review information on stroke, acute chest syndrome, inheritance pattern, and genetic risk to subsequent siblings.
Two to five years
●Intervals for visits
•HbSS and HbS-β0 thalassemia: Every three to four months
•HbSC and HbS-β+ thalassemia: Every four to six months
●Immunizations — Administer pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23), with the first dose to be given at or after 24 months of age, at least eight weeks after the last dose of pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) [27]. This vaccine is recommended for children with SCD because they are likely to have or to develop functional asplenia, and thus are at high risk for invasive pneumococcal disease (see "Pneumococcal (Streptococcus pneumoniae) polysaccharide vaccines in children"). In addition, administer inactivated influenza vaccine annually [27]. (See "Prevention of sepsis in the asplenic patient", section on 'Immunizations'.)

Early meningococcal vaccination also is recommended. For children who did not receive the combination conjugate vaccine against Hib and meningococcus (HibMenCY) during infancy, a two-dose series of quadrivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccine (MCV4, Menactra or Menveo) may be given two months apart, starting between 2 and 10 years of age [29]. A single booster dose of MCV4 is advised every five years thereafter. The efficacy of the meningococcal vaccines in asplenic children has not been clearly established, but they are recommended for this group because they are at increased risk for meningococcal infections. Other details regarding meningococcal vaccination are outlined in the table (table 2) and are discussed in greater detail separately. (See "Meningococcal vaccines", section on 'United States'.)
●Penicillin prophylaxis — For children with HbSS and HbS-β0 thalassemia, the dose should be increased to 250 mg twice a day at three years of age. Penicillin may be discontinued at five years of age, following the second dose of PPSV23 [13].
●Transcranial Doppler screening — Transcranial Doppler (TCD) screening effectively identifies children at highest risk of clinical stroke [17]. A structured screening program using TCD, followed by chronic transfusion therapy for children with abnormal results, can dramatically reduce the incidence of stroke [30]. For patients with HbSS and HbS-β0 thalassemia, TCD screening should be offered starting at two years of age and should be repeated at least annually. (See 'Stroke' above and"Cerebrovascular complications of sickle cell disease", section on 'Prevention of a first stroke'.)
●Snoring or obstructive sleep apnea — Upper airway obstruction during sleep due to adenotonsillar enlargement has been found in up to one-third of children with SCD. If significant obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is present, this may cause intermittent hypoxemia, which can promote sickling. There are no specific guidelines regarding screening for OSA in children with SCD. However, we suggest specifically questioning the family about whether the child snores consistently, has respiratory pauses of 10 to 15 seconds or gasping during sleep, is hard to awaken, or falls asleep easily during the day [31]. If these warning signs are present, we suggest consultation with an ear-nose-throat (ENT) specialist and/or assessment with a sleep study (polysomnogram). (See "Evaluation of suspected obstructive sleep apnea in children".)
●Enuresis — The majority of hematologically normal children will become continent day and night at some time between two and five years of age. Children with SCD are somewhat less likely to be continent at night compared with healthy children. Education about behavioral modification should be offered to all families. Techniques include awakening the child to void to facilitate dry nights and offering praise when the child is dry rather than punishment for bedwetting.
●Caregiver education — Highlight issues of stroke, priapism (in males), home pain management, spleen palpation, importance of penicillin prophylaxis (in SS), and acute chest syndrome. Review fever plan, growth, development, and blood counts.
Five years to adolescence
●Intervals for visits
•HbSS and HbS-β0 thalassemia: Every six months
•HbSC and HbS-β+ thalassemia: Every 8 to 12 months
●Immunizations — Guidelines now recommend administration of a second dose of PPSV23 five years after the first dose [32]. We suggest continuing twice daily prophylactic penicillin until after the second dose of PPSV23 is given, rather than stopping prophylaxis at age five years as previously recommended (Grade 2C), although guidelines are not specific on this point (see 'Prophylactic penicillin' above). A dose of inactivated influenza vaccine should be given annually. Children who were not previously immunized against Hib should receive one dose of the Hib vaccine [27]. Immunizations for patients with SCD and other causes of functional asplenia are discussed in detail in a separate topic review. (See "Prevention of sepsis in the asplenic patient", section on 'Immunizations'.) 

Complete the two-dose series of meningococcal vaccination (MCV4, Menactra or Menveo) if not already done, and supplement with a booster dose every five years (table 2). (See 'Two to five years' above.)
●Transcranial Doppler (TCD) screening — Annual screening with TCD should be continued in patients with HbSS and HbS-β0 thalassemia at least through age 10 or as long as the patient’s bone windows allow meaningful waveforms to be evaluated. A mechanism should be in place to track all patients in the risk group and to recall them for additional testing if elevated values are found. (See 'Stroke' above.)
●Education — Children with SCD face specific challenges in the educational setting. The following areas of concern should be reviewed:
•Ensure that the child is sent to school every day possible and that the school is prepared to administer pain medications, if needed, to help the child stay in the classroom as much as possible.
•At every visit, the child’s level of educational achievement should be reviewed. Given the high incidence of stroke and “silent” infarcts, particularly in children with HbSS and HbS-β0 thalassemia, signs of poor educational performance should prompt investigation with a brain magnetic resonance imaging or angiography (MRI or MRA) and with neuropsychologic testing (if available).
•Parents should be advised of the federal legislative mandate in the United States regarding educational accommodation for children with special health care needs (CSHCN) such as SCD and should be assisted in obtaining services required to support their child’s education. Mechanisms for accommodation include special education and other health impaired (OHI) 504 programs. (See "Support services for the care of chronically ill children", section on 'Education'.)
●Additional screening — The following screening is recommended to start somewhere after 10 years of age and to continue annually thereafter, because of the high incidence of dysfunction in these organ systems:
•Urinalysis for protein (microalbumin) and serum creatinine, to screen for proteinuria and sickle cell nephropathy [33] (see "Renal manifestations of sickle cell disease")
•Dilated eye exam for proliferative retinopathy that may lead to retinal detachment, especially in patients with HbSC disease [5] (see "Overview of the clinical manifestations of sickle cell disease", section on 'Retinopathy')
●Caregiver education — In this age group, there is a gradual shift of focus from education of the patient’s caregivers to education of the patient, as appropriate to his or her age and developmental ability. Highlight issues of pain recognition and management, acute chest syndrome (and asthma control), snoring, enuresis, priapism (in males), growth, and development, focusing on early pubertal changes and growth. Review fever plan, stroke, blood counts, and spleen palpation. In patients with HbSC, splenic sequestration is most common among patients five years of age and up.
Older adolescents
●Intervals for visits
•HbSS and HbS-β0 thalassemia: Every six months
•HbSC and HbS-β+ thalassemia: Every 8 to 12 months
●Immunizations — Administer a dose of inactivated influenza vaccine annually. Verify that the entire pneumococcal vaccine (PCV13 and PPSV23) and meningococcal vaccine series have been administered (table 3 and table 2). (See "Prevention of sepsis in the asplenic patient", section on 'Immunizations'.)
●Growth and pubertal development — Puberty may be delayed in some patients with SCD. Evaluation by an endocrinologist may be helpful for children with particularly poor growth (eg, growth velocity or values below the third percentile) or for children who have not started pubertal development by 13 to 14 years of age [25]. (See"Diagnosis and treatment of delayed puberty".)
●Transition planning — The last several years of care in a pediatric setting should include a structured plan of patient education about the special health care needs of individuals with SCD during adulthood. The education and medical visits should focus on the patient rather than the family, as permitted by the patient’s age and cognitive abilities. The content of this program should include the site of adult sickle cell care, including plans for care if pursuing college or other higher education, as well as the source of funding for ongoing health care [34].
●Reproductive issues — Reproductive issues should be discussed with female and male patients. Key issues include:
•Review the inheritance pattern and genetic risk of SCD, with a focus on implications for the patient’s offspring
•The availability of testing to determine risk of having a child with SCD, which depends upon the hemoglobinopathy status of the partner
•Medical facts about birth control (especially in females), including preference for progesterone-containing medications or barrier methods, because of possible increased risk of thrombosis. (see "Pregnancy in women with sickle cell disease", section on 'Contraception')
•Increased risk of maternal and fetal complications during pregnancy for women with SCD. These risks can be moderated with planning of pregnancy and with special prenatal care. (See "Pregnancy in women with sickle cell disease".)
●Additional screening — Continue with annual urine analysis and measurement of creatinine [33], as well as dilated eye exam. Patients who develop exercise intolerance or chest pain should be evaluated with a cardiac echocardiogram to assess for pulmonary hypertension.
●Patient education — The provider should repeatedly review medical issues that require monitoring and should follow up to ensure that the patient clearly understands risks and goals. Highlight issues of pain, acute chest syndrome (and asthma control), priapism (in males), and educational plan. Review fever plan, spleen palpation (for patients with hemoglobin SC disease), blood counts, and patient’s understanding of treatment options, including hydroxyurea, chronic transfusion therapy, and stem cell transplant.
Other components of a comprehensive care program
Care plans — Structured care plans are valuable tools. For a multidisciplinary team, a care plan ensures consistency and coordination of goals among providers and ensures that elements of care are not overlooked. Areas in which this approach may be particularly beneficial include:
●Chronic transfusion care plan — This designates a location dedicated to scheduled outpatient transfusion and a plan for routine monthly laboratory testing, identifying specific providers to review results and to make clinical decisions on an ongoing basis. In addition to hematocrit, laboratory monitoring should include tests to determine the level of transfusional iron overload (ferritin and a periodic quantitative assessment of liver iron), monitoring of iron chelation, and determination of adherence to the chelation therapy. (See "Overview of the management and prognosis of sickle cell disease", section on 'Transfusion therapy'.)
●Perioperative care plan — This includes preoperative preparation with hydration or transfusion, pre-anesthesia consultation, and postoperative care for common procedures. Patients with SCD have a high frequency of perioperative complications, but prophylactic preoperative transfusion does not appear to improve outcomes. (See "Overview of the management and prognosis of sickle cell disease", section on 'Prophylactic preoperative transfusion'.)
●Pain management care plan — A pain management plan can be customized to each patient’s need, or it can outline a general approach, with modifications for a specific patient that are designed during a routine visit.
●Sports and physical education plans — This plan outlines special considerations about athletic participation for children with SCD, including standard recommendations and teaching for parents, patients, and teachers. In general, children with SCD may participate in sports with instructions to stop if tired in order to avoid overexertion, overheating, and dehydration that may predispose to sickle cell painful crises.
Other components of a care plan address special educational needs (see 'Five years to adolescence' above) and steps in transitioning to adult medical care (see 'Older adolescents' above), as described above.
Other specialists for consultation — Due to the large number of organ systems that are commonly affected by SCD, it is desirable to locate a referral pool of other subspecialists knowledgeable about these issues and willing to see sickle cell patients in referral. These disciplines are:
●Anesthesiology — For perioperative care and pain management
●Cardiology — For pulmonary hypertension
●Endocrine — For poor linear growth and/or delayed puberty
●Nephrology — For hypertension, proteinuria, or renal insufficiency
●Neurology — For stroke, silent infarct, or headache
●Orthopedics — For avascular necrosis of the femoral and humeral heads
●Otorhinolaryngology (ENT) — For evaluation of suspected obstructive sleep apnea and for possible tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy
●Pulmonary — For asthma or pulmonary hypertension
●Surgery — For cholelithiasis or splenectomy
●Urology — For prolonged priapism or enuresis
●Other disciplines that may be valuable for selected patients include:
•Social work — To assist families in coping with the emotional burden of SCD, in identifying resources for medical care, in meeting requirements of care, in addressing the child’s educational needs, in developing skills of parenting, and in identifying options for adult care
•Psychologist — To offer individual counseling for children with mental health issues including depression, to assess for school avoidance behavior, to coordinate or administer neuropsychologic testing, to advise on need for educational accommodations, and to facilitate for the transition to adult care
•Educational diagnostician or school services — To inform parents about available educational accommodations and to help the parent communicate with the school about the child’s needs
INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS — UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, “The Basics” and “Beyond the Basics.” The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5th to 6th grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10th to 12th grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.
Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles on a variety of subjects by searching on “patient info” and the keyword(s) of interest.)
●Basics topic (see "Patient information: When your child has sickle cell disease (The Basics)")
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS — All infants and children with sickle cell disease (SCD) should be managed by or in consultation with a clinician with special expertise in SCD. Depending upon local resources, the experienced SCD clinician may be a pediatric hematologist (often within a specialized SCD program) or may be a knowledgeable general pediatrician or family physician.
●Most infants with SCD should be seen by an experienced SCD clinician by eight weeks of age. The SCD clinician or team will confirm the SCD diagnosis and type, will provide anticipatory guidance about common early SCD-specific childhood issues, will teach the family to evaluate for complications that require urgent treatment, will develop strategies to provide requisite urgent care when complications do arise, and will determine the necessity for prophylactic penicillin. (See 'First visit with a sickle cell disease clinician' above.)
●During the first visit, priorities for family education include basic genetic counseling about inheritance patterns of SCD, teaching of the technique of splenic palpation to assess for splenomegaly (splenic sequestration), a plan for urgent evaluation of the infant or child for any fever (typically using a threshold of ≥101.5°F [38.5°C]), and a plan for when and how to contact the SCD clinician should problems arise. This information should also be reinforced at subsequent visits. (See 'Education and anticipatory guidance' above.)
●During subsequent visits, additional education should be provided about painful crises, acute chest syndrome, stroke, and priapism (in males). Families should understand these risks and should learn how to recognize and respond to symptoms. This information should be reviewed and reinforced at multiple visits. (See'Additional education' above.)
●All families should learn about available treatment with hydroxyurea, chronic transfusion, and stem cell transplantation. The indications, risks, and benefits of each of these treatments should be discussed and reviewed in detail when appropriate. (See 'Hydroxyurea, chronic transfusion, and stem cell transplantation' above.)
●During follow-up visits, routine monitoring includes a complete blood count (CBC), reticulocyte count, measurements of growth, and vital signs (including blood pressure), as well as a focused history and physical examination. Oxygen saturation should be measured at least annually, using a transcutaneous sensor (TcO2). The frequency of these visits may vary depending upon SCD type, family needs, other medical conditions, and available medical resources. (See 'Routine monitoring at all visits'above.)
●Additional tasks during the follow-up visits depend upon the patient’s age and include review and/or administration of immunizations (table 4) and penicillin prophylaxis, as well as education of the family and patient about SCD-related health issues, tailored to the patient’s age and medical condition. (See 'Additional age-specific tasks'above.)
●For patients with hemoglobin SS (HbSS) or hemoglobin S-β0 thalassemia (HbS-β0 thalassemia), transcranial Doppler (TCD) screening should be offered starting at the age of two years and should be repeated at least annually at least through age 10. This procedure identifies children at an increased risk for stroke. In addition, children with poor educational performance or other possible signs of neurologic dysfunction should have further evaluation, which may include brain magnetic resonance imaging or angiography (MRI or MRA), as well as neuropsychologic testing. (See 'Stroke' above.)
●For adolescent patients, routine visits should also include discussion of reproductive issues and planning for transition to adult care. Adolescent patients should undergo routine screening for renal and ophthalmologic complications of SCD. (See 'Older adolescents' above.)

