Geriatric health maintenance
INTRODUCTION — The profile of aging in the United States (US) has changed dramatically over the last century. The average life expectancy at birth has increased from 47 years in 1900 to over 78 years in 2008. By 2030, the percentage of the population over 65 years of age will exceed 20 percent, or over 70 million people [1].
Definitions of health and well-being in late life have changed with the increase in life expectancy. Heart disease, cancer, and stroke have become the leading "killers" among older adults, while deaths due to infection have decreased. Adults surviving into late life suffer from high rates of chronic illness; 80 percent have at least one and 50 percent have at least two chronic conditions [1]. There is a strong association between the presence of geriatric syndromes (cognitive impairment, falls, incontinence, vision or hearing impairment, low body mass index, dizziness) and dependency in activities of daily living (relative risk 2.1 for one condition; 6.6 for three or more conditions) [2].
Decline in function and loss of independence are NOT an inevitable consequence of aging. Given the high prevalence and impact of chronic health problems among older patients, evidence-based interventions to address these problems become increasingly important to maximize both the quantity and quality of life for older adults.
The Assessing Care of Vulnerable Elders (ACOVE-3) project identifies quality indicators in the care of older adults, including recommendations for routine health maintenance [3]. Clinician experts serving as authors for this project have critically evaluated the evidence supporting these quality indicators, and their review, in conjunction with other sources, is used in the development of this discussion.
This topic offers a brief discussion of office-based assessments to identify and address common problems that are amenable to prevention or amelioration in older adults. An overview of preventive medicine for the general population is presented separately. (See "Overview of preventive medicine in adults".)
GOALS OF CARE FOR OLDER ADULTS — Older individuals differ greatly in their physiologic and functional status. This wide heterogeneity in health states among older adults means that treatment decisions, both preventive and therapeutic, should be considered based on individual needs. Age alone should not be the sole determinant for many interventions, and all treatments should aim to preserve function and maximize quality of life.
For decisions related to screening and other preventive interventions, the concept of lag time to benefit is relevant [4]. If a screening intervention, such as screening for colorectal cancer with fecal occult blood testing, has a lag time of 10 years for a risk reduction of 1 death per 1000 persons screened, and an individual has a predicted life expectancy of five years, then such screening would not be likely to provide benefit for that individual. Studies suggest that many older patients in the US, and women in particular, both receive screening tests that are inappropriate for their age or health status and do not receive other screening tests and preventive interventions (eg, immunizations and counseling) that are recommended for health maintenance [5,6].
A proposed framework for primary care for older individuals that defines short-term, mid-range, and long-term goals may help providers more appropriately and effectively prioritize issues in this population [7]. Short-term issues focus on immediate needs to maintain or restore current health status and may be the sole focus for patients at the end of life. Such issues may relate to symptom management, care coordination, personal safety, and living situation. Mid-range issues, addressing needs over the subsequent one to five years, involve preventive care, disease management, psychological issues, and coping strategies. Long-term issues, relating to plans to be implemented at the time of eventual decline, are important to consider for older adults who are currently healthy and high-functioning. Approximations of life expectancy based on health and function can help providers, patients, and caregivers in prioritizing issues and making decisions. Evidence-based tools available online at www.eprognosis.orgcan help generate estimates of survival for older adults with different conditions and in different settings.
While this topic is organized around a traditional preventive care model, providers are encouraged to consider the individual patients’ health status, preferences, and priorities in management of the issues discussed below. This review serves as a guide for discussions and decisions regarding use of preventive services among older adults, and also provides descriptions and tools useful in performing the assessments contained in the Medicare IPPE. (See 'Medicare and preventive visits' below.)
CLASSIFICATION OF PREVENTIVE MEASURES — Epidemiologists have traditionally categorized strategies for disease prevention and health promotion into three levels: primary, secondary, and tertiary. This is the terminology that will be used in this discussion. (See "Evidence-based approach to prevention".)
●Primary prevention aims to avert the development of disease. Immunizations, life style modifications (smoking cessation, promoting physical activity), and chemoprophylaxis (aspirin for primary prevention of heart disease) fall under the category of primary prevention.
●Secondary prevention focuses on early detection and treatment of asymptomatic disease. Screening for cancer, hearing or vision impairment, osteoporosis, hypertension, and abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) are examples of secondary prevention.
●Tertiary prevention identifies established conditions to prevent further morbidity or functional decline. Identification of cognitive problems, disorders of gait and balance, malnutrition, and urinary incontinence are examples.
It should be noted that there is discrepancy in terminology as commonly used in the epidemiological and clinical literature. Thus, the term "secondary prevention" as defined here refers to early detection of asymptomatic disease, generally by screening, while the term "secondary prevention" as used by cardiologists and others refers to prevention of further events in patients with known established disease. Thus, targeting lower cholesterol levels or using beta blockers in patients with known coronary disease is referred to by cardiologists as "secondary prevention" but would be identified as tertiary prevention in the nomenclature discussed here.
Similarly, screening for dyslipidemia is referred to here as "secondary prevention" but is often considered primary prevention by cardiologists and others.
A summary of recommendations for screening and prevention for specific conditions is presented in a table (table 1). A list of screening measures covered by Medicare is provided in a table (table 2).
PRIMARY PREVENTION — Encouraging older adults to adopt a healthy lifestyle may lower their risk of developing disability. In one cohort of individuals aged 65 and older who were without disability at baseline and followed for 12 years, the risk of developing moderate to severe disability was greater for individuals who had only low or intermediate levels of physical activity (HR 1.72, 95% CI 1.48-2.00), ate less than one serving of fruit or vegetable daily (1.24, CI 1.10-1.41), or were current smokers or short term ex-smokers (HR 1.26, CI 1.05-1.50) [8].
Physical activity — Exercise benefits people of all ages and may decrease all cause morbidity and increase lifespan [9,10].
All older adults, including the very old, those with multiple morbidities, or those who are in chronic care facilities, can benefit from physical activity. Participation in any amount of physical activity will result in some health benefit. A description of the benefits of exercise and a full discussion of exercise recommendations for older adults are presented separately. (See "Overview of the benefits and risks of exercise" and "Physical activity and exercise in older adults".)
The American Heart Association (AHA) and the American College of Sport Medicine (ACSM) provide recommendations for adults over age 65 years for various types of activity and guides for implementing such programs [11]. Specific exercises fall into four categories: aerobic, muscle strengthening, flexibility, and balance.
●For aerobic activity, guidelines suggest a minimum of 30 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise on five days each week, or a minimum of 20 minutes of vigorous-intensity activity on three days each week, or some combination of the two [11]. Definitions for moderate and vigorous activity depend on the person's baseline conditioning.
●Exercises to maintain and increase muscle strength include weight training, weight bearing calisthenics, or resistance training.
●Evidence supporting flexibility activities is less rigorous, but most experts recommend 10 minutes of some static stretching of major muscle groups on days when aerobic or muscle strengthening exercise is performed, to maintain range of motion.
●Balance training exercises are recommended to improve stability and prevent falls and injuries related to falls. Static balance training involves learning to recover balance on a tilting balance platform. Dynamic balance training, such as Tai Chi, may be more accessible outside of a formal supervised setting [12-14].
The AHA/ACSM guidelines emphasize a graduated or stepwise introduction of physical activity to improve safety and adherence. An individualized "activity plan" should recommend levels of physical activity and define how the individual will meet them. Developing an activity plan, particularly for older adults with chronic conditions, may warrant input from physical therapists/exercise physiologists or referral to specialty programs (eg, cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation). Routine electrocardiogram (EKG) or cardiac exercise testing are not indicated for asymptomatic patients who are preparing to undergo an exercise program. The Medicare IPPE, however, does provide coverage for an initial 12 lead EKG and its interpretation as part of the introductory visit. (See "Screening for coronary heart disease", section on 'Exercise ECG testing in asymptomatic individuals' and "Physical activity and exercise in older adults", section on 'Initiating exercise'.)
Tobacco use — Rates of smoking and tobacco use are lower for adults over age 65 than for younger individuals [15]. Nonetheless, the older generation has a long history of high rates of smoking and excess smoking-related mortality from lung cancer, cardiovascular disease, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [16].
High-quality evidence demonstrates that smoking cessation significantly reduces the risk for coronary heart disease, various cancers, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [17]. One study addressed smoking cessation in older community-dwelling adults and found that, within five years of stopping smoking, the relative risk for all cause mortality fell below that for current smokers [18]. (See "Patterns of tobacco use".)
ACOVE authors identified several smoking cessation techniques that were effective in general clinical practice, including physician recommendation, formal counseling, and pharmacotherapy [3]. Ongoing regular counseling for smoking cessation for all patients who use tobacco products is recommended by the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF). (See "Smoking cessation counseling strategies in primary care".)
Nicotine replacement, although not specifically studied in older individuals, has been shown to be effective as an adjunct for selected patients [19]. Other options, includingbupropion and varenicline, may also be reasonable choices for older patients [20]. (See "Overview of smoking cessation management in adults".)
Alcohol — Approximately 15 percent of adults over age 65 years experience health problems related to the complications of alcohol consumption in combination with medication or chronic conditions. Two to 4 percent meet criteria for alcoholism [21]. Alcohol use in older adults may negatively impact function and cognition, as well as general health [3].
Risk factors for alcohol abuse among older adults include bereavement, depression, anxiety, pain, disability, and a prior history of alcohol use. A variety of screening tools are effective for identifying alcohol misuse in older patients [3]. The American Geriatrics Society guidelines suggest specific questioning regarding the frequency and quantity of alcohol use followed by asking the CAGE questions (Cut down, Annoyed, Guilty, Eye-opener) to identify patients with alcohol related problems [21]. (See "Screening for unhealthy use of alcohol and other drugs", section on 'CAGE questions'.)
The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) has developed an excellent clinician tool for helping patients who consume alcohol to excess [22]. Physician recommendations and advice may be as effective as more detailed behavioral counseling programs at reducing alcohol use [3].
Aspirin for primary prevention — USPSTF guidelines "strongly recommend" that clinicians discuss aspirin chemoprevention in adults who are at increased risk for cardiovascular disease (five-year risk of ≥3 percent) [19]. Results of the Women's Health Study [23] and a systematic review [24] suggest that the benefits and risks of aspirin for coronary heart disease and stroke may differ in men and women. Aspirin appears to provide men with protection from first myocardial infarction, and women from first ischemic stroke. (See "Benefits and risks of aspirin in secondary and primary prevention of cardiovascular disease".)
The risks of gastrointestinal bleeding with low-dose aspirin in older adults are well documented [25]. A decision analysis indicated that risks of gastrointestinal bleeding may offset the benefit of preventing a first myocardial infarction or stroke among some older adults [26]. Individual risks for bleeding, stroke, and coronary events should be reviewed with older patients in the process of shared decision making regarding aspirin use as primary prevention. (See "Overview of primary prevention of coronary heart disease and stroke", section on 'Aspirin' and "Benefits and risks of aspirin in secondary and primary prevention of cardiovascular disease".)
Guidelines from the American College of Cardiology/American College of Gastroenterology/American Heart Association, however, suggest using a PPI for all patients over 60 years of age who are maintained on chronic aspirin therapy [27]. (See "NSAIDs (including aspirin): Primary prevention of gastroduodenal toxicity", section on 'Prevention strategies'.)
Immunizations — A summary of recommended immunizations for adults from the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) is shown in a table (figure 1 and figure 2).
Tetanus vaccine — Clinical tetanus, though rare in the United States, occurs predominantly in unvaccinated or underimmunized older adults. Patients older than 60 years account for approximately 60 percent of all cases of tetanus in the United States [28].
The USPSTF recommends booster doses of adult-type tetanus and diphtheria toxoid every 10 years, although longer intervals are probably adequate for those vaccinated in childhood or young adulthood. Studies have demonstrated the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of a single booster in producing sustained immunity to both tetanus and diphtheria among older patients (aged 50 to 70) who had received a primary booster series [29-31]. The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) still recommends a booster every 10 years, while the American College of Physicians (ACP) and the ACOVE authors support a single Td booster in late life (age >50 years) in patients who have completed the primary series and have not had a booster within the last 10 years. (See "Tetanus-diphtheria toxoid vaccination in adults".)
In fall 2010, the ACIP voted to recommend that a single dose of Tdap vaccine may be given in place of Td for adults ≥65 years who have not received Tdap [32,33]. This is important for adults ≥65 who have close contact with infants aged younger than one year (such as grandparents, child care providers, and health care providers) [34]. Tdap should be administered regardless of the interval since the last dose of Td. This represents a change from previous ACIP guidelines, which recommended that Tdap be given a minimum of two years after the last dose of Td in most cases.
Influenza vaccine — More than 90 percent of influenza-related deaths occur among people ≥60 years of age [35]. Older adults also experience significantly increased morbidity from the disease.
Meta-analyses indicate that influenza vaccination may reduce the incidence of influenza, influenza-like illness, hospitalization rates for pneumonia and influenza, and deaths after hospitalization [36,37]. Although one epidemiological study did not show mortality benefit for influenza vaccination in older patients [38], a more recent observational study, involving over 700,000 older person seasons, found that influenza vaccination was associated with reduced risk for hospitalization (OR 0.73; 95% CI 0.68-0.77) and an almost 50 percent reduction in mortality (OR 0.52, 0.50-0.55) [39]. (See "Seasonal influenza vaccination in adults", section on 'Elderly patients'.)
Annual influenza immunization for all adults is recommended by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) as of 2010 [40]. The live attenuated intranasal preparation (Flumist) is not approved for use in adults over age 50. (See "Seasonal influenza vaccination in adults".)
In December 2009, the US Food and Drug Administration approved a high-dose inactivated influenza vaccine for individuals ≥65 years of age [41]. The approval was based on data showing increased immunogenicity of the high-dose vaccine in older adults. However, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices has not stated a preference for this vaccine over the standard dose vaccine in older adults since there are no data demonstrating greater protection against influenza illness.
Pneumococcal vaccine — Pneumococcal disease is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in older adults. A 23-valent polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23) and 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) are available, but only PPSV23 is recommended for healthy adults [42]. All adults 65 years of age and older should receive a dose of PPSV23 even if they were vaccinated when they were younger than 65 years of age [19]. However, a minimum interval of five years between PPSV23 doses should be maintained. A meta-analysis from 2008 found strong evidence that pneumococcal vaccine decreases risk for invasive pneumococcal disease (eg, bacteremia and meningitis) (OR 0.26, 95% CI 0.15-0.46) but did not demonstrate reduction in all cause pneumonia or mortality [42]. (See "Pneumococcal vaccination in adults".)  
Herpes zoster vaccine — Herpes zoster or shingles, due to reactivation of latent varicella zoster virus, causes a painful localized rash. Sequelae, including post-herpetic neuralgia, encephalitis, myelitis, and palsies of cranial and peripheral nerves, are more common in older patients. Herpes zoster affects about 30 percent of individuals over their lifetime, with a substantial increase in risk (8- to 10-fold) in late life [43].
A vaccine for immunocompetent adults over 60 years of age was US FDA approved in 2006 to prevent herpes zoster [44]. It was FDA-approved for use in persons 50 to 59 years of age in 2011. The zoster vaccine was also approved in the countries of the European Union by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) in 2006 for immunocompetent adults 50 years of age or older. The zoster vaccine contains more than 14 times the number of plaque-forming units of virus than does the Oka/Merck varicella vaccine for prevention of varicella [45].
In a randomized trial in 38,500 adults over 60 years of age, zoster vaccine, compared with placebo, reduced the three-year incidence of herpes zoster and postherpetic neuralgia by 51 and 67 percent, respectively [45]. In a large retrospective cohort study, vaccination reduced the risk of herpes zoster by 55 percent, with risk reduction seen in both healthy older adults and those with chronic disease such as diabetes or coronary artery disease [46].
The ACIP recommends herpes zoster vaccination for all immunocompetent persons age 60 years and older, regardless of history of varicella (chickenpox) or documentation of varicella immunity, for the prevention of herpes zoster and postherpetic neuralgia [47]. However, the ACIP declined to recommend zoster vaccine for adults 50 to 59 years old, citing concerns regarding zoster vaccine shortfalls for general use [48]. The vaccine should not be used for the treatment of zoster or postherpetic neuralgia.
Vaccine storage requires freezing, and the vaccine must be administered within 30 minutes of thawing, suggesting a practical need for specified sessions for vaccine administration in clinics/medical offices. (See "Prevention of varicella-zoster virus infection: Herpes zoster", section on 'Clinical trial data on zoster vaccine'.)
SECONDARY PREVENTION
Cancer screening — Medical and surgical interventions have led to a decline in the age-specific mortality rates of many malignancies, including breast, colorectal, and cervical cancer [49]. Screening asymptomatic adults for these diseases has allowed more effective treatment through early detection.
However, both screening tests and disease treatment have been less rigorously evaluated in older adults, leading to more uncertainty about the benefit of screening among older patients [50,51]. Additionally, comorbid illness and frailty alter the risk-benefit ratio for screening in this group [52].
The decision to offer cancer screening to the older patient presents a clinical challenge. Clinicians should assess the benefits and risks of screening for older adults on an individual basis, considering the patient’s estimated remaining life expectancy, and help patients make decisions based on personal values and preferences (table 3) [4,50,53]. Specific consideration should be given to colorectal, breast, and cervical cancer screening as interventions likely to be most effective in reducing cancer-specific mortality [54,55].
The ideal rate of cancer screening among the older adult population remains unclear. In a sample of 1700 noninstitutionalized adults 75 to 79 years old in the United States, screening rates exceeded 50 percent for common cancers (colorectal 57 percent, breast 62 percent, cervical 53 percent, and prostate 56 percent); whether this screening was appropriately targeted to individuals who would likely benefit from early detection and treatment of cancer is not known [56,57].
Prostate cancer screening — The USPSTF updated its recommendations in 2012 to recommend that men not be screened for prostate cancer, concluding that there is moderate certainty that the benefits of such screening do not outweigh the harms [58]. The ACP recommends individual discussion of the risks and benefits of prostate cancer screening and suggests that men between the ages of 50 to 69 years are most likely to benefit from screening. Black men and men with a positive family history of prostate cancer should be informed of their higher lifetime risk, although the available evidence does not suggest that they need to be treated differently from men at average risk [59]. Randomized controlled trials indicate little benefit in prostate cancer specific mortality within 10 years of screening and no discernible benefit in overall mortality out to 14 years [60,61]. Given high rates of side effects associated with treating potentially-inconsequential, screen-detected prostate cancer, older adult men appear to have little to gain from routine screening, particularly if they have less than 10 years of life expectancy. (See "Screening for prostate cancer".)
Colorectal cancer screening — The evidence supporting screening for colorectal cancer is strongest, with randomized controlled trials of fecal occult blood testing associated with a 15 to 20 percent decrease in cancer specific mortality [62-65]. Screening test options for colorectal cancer include colonoscopy, CT colonography ("virtual colonoscopy"), flexible sigmoidoscopy, stool testing for blood (guaiac or immunochemical), or stool DNA testing. (See "Screening for colorectal cancer: Strategies in patients at average risk".)
Given its ability to visualize the entire colon, colonoscopy has become the invasive screening procedure of choice. Studies, however, suggest that sigmoidoscopy may be as effective and possibly safer than colonoscopy [66,67]. Significant complications (bleeding and bowel perforation) occurred in 0.3 percent of 600 veterans aged 70 to 75 undergoing screening with colonoscopy, compared to 0.01 percent for sigmoidoscopy [68].
Current recommendations from the USPSTF suggest offering colorectal cancer screening to average-risk individuals aged 50 to 75 years [69]. The USPSTF recommends against screening for adults older than age 85 years and against routine screening for adults 76 to 85 years of age, though specific considerations may support colorectal cancer screening for some individuals in this age group. Patients with cardiopulmonary disease or poor functional status who are expected to live long enough to benefit from screening might be considered for CT colonography as a preferred initial screening test. (See "Screening for colorectal cancer: Strategies in patients at average risk", section on 'Screening in older adults'.)
Breast cancer screening — Prospective controlled trials of screening mammography for breast cancer demonstrate an approximate 30 percent reduction in breast cancer mortality among screened versus unscreened women. However, these studies enrolled women only up to ages 70 to 74 [70,71]. Guidelines are vague on breast cancer screening for older women, but the AGS recommends offering screening every one to two years for women with a life expectancy of ≥4 years [72]. (See "Screening for breast cancer: Strategies and recommendations".)
Cervical cancer screening — Cervical cancer is no more aggressive in older women than younger women, and high-grade lesions are rare among older women who have been previously screened. Nonetheless, older women who have never been screened have the highest incidence of and mortality from cervical cancer and benefit the most from screening [73-77]. In the US, Medicare began providing reimbursement for Pap smear screening in 1990, motivated by findings that up to 40 percent of older adult women had never had a Pap smear [78-81].
Most major guidelines recommend stopping cervical cancer screening at age 65 for women who have had adequate recent screening. Adequate screening is defined as three consecutive negative cytology tests or two consecutive negative HPV/Pap co-tests in the 10 years prior to stopping, with the most recent test within five years. Women who have had a total hysterectomy for indications unrelated to cervical cancer should not undergo screening for cervical cancer. (See "Screening for cervical cancer: Rationale and recommendations", section on 'Discontinuing screening' and "Screening for cervical cancer: Rationale and recommendations", section on 'Prior hysterectomy'.)
Blood pressure screening — Hypertension is highly prevalent among older adults (60 to 80 percent) and remains the leading risk factor for ischemic heart disease and stroke [82].
Older adults have a unique blood pressure pattern, with isolated systolic hypertension affecting two-thirds of those with elevated blood pressure. The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC-7) emphasizes the importance of systolic blood pressures as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease and stroke, especially in older adults [83].
Treatment of hypertension has contributed to a 59 percent reduction in age-adjusted stroke mortality and a 50 percent reduction in mortality from coronary artery disease since 1972 [84]. Blood pressure treatment trials in older adults have consistently demonstrated significantly decreased all-cause mortality, cardiovascular events, stroke, and chronic kidney disease [85-87]. A meta-analysis of trials including participants over age 80 demonstrated reductions in stroke, heart failure, and major cardiovascular events with treatment [88]. Treatment options include diet, physical activity, and pharmacotherapy to lower blood pressure to goal and thereby reduce morbidity and mortality related to HTN. (See "Treatment of hypertension in the elderly patient, particularly isolated systolic hypertension".)
Major authorities (USPSTF, Canadian Task Force, the American College of Physicians, the American Academy of Family Practice, and the American Geriatrics Society) recommend periodic testing of blood pressure with intervals ranging from one to two years [89]. The ACP and ACOVE recommend annual screening for all older adults [86].
Concern has been raised in the past about the risks of aggressive treatment of hypertension in older adults, including orthostatic hypotension, falls, renal dysfunction, electrolyte disturbance, and, in small studies, increased mortality [88,90]. The benefits of treatment, however, are likely to outweigh risks for many patients [91]. Among frail older adults (defined as gait speed <0.8 m/second), though, an observational study found no association between blood pressure and mortality [92]. In addition, a higher blood pressure was associated with a lower risk of death among the most frail (ie, those who could not walk well enough to test gait speed). The expected association of a higher blood pressure with a greater mortality risk was observed only among the most fit individuals.
Care should be taken to avoid complications when treatment is undertaken:
●Initial treatment should involve trials of nonpharmacologic measures, such as reduction of salt, weight loss, and discontinuing medications that increase blood pressure (eg, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs) [93].
●If pharmacologic therapy is necessary, initiate medication at very low doses.
●Monitor prescription adherence, renal function, electrolytes, orthostatic blood pressure and pulse, and assess for gait instability and falls [86].
Lipid screening — The risk of CHD attributable to lipids is similar across age ranges [94]. Older adults have a higher overall annual risk of CHD and stand to benefit from lipid reduction if life expectancy warrants [95]. (See "Treatment of dyslipidemia in the older adult".)
The USPSTF has found good evidence that lipid measurement can identify asymptomatic people at increased risk of coronary heart disease, and good evidence that lipid lowering drug therapy decreases the incidence of coronary heart disease in people with abnormal lipids and causes few major harms [19]. The Task Force concludes that the benefits of screening for and treating lipid disorders in older people outweigh harms.
Lipid lowering therapy clearly benefits older adults at high risk of coronary events. The benefit of primary prevention for low-risk older adults remains unclear. For those with an overall risk of CHD exceeding 10 percent over 10 years, screening and treatment appear to be substantiated [94]. (See "Screening for lipid disorders".)
Osteoporosis — The prevalence of low bone mineral density in older adults is high. Osteopenia is found in 37 percent of post-menopausal women, and osteoporosis (bone mineral density or BMD >2.5 SD below the mean for young women) in 7 percent [96].
The USPSTF recommends that women aged 65 and older be screened routinely for osteoporosis using bone densitometry [97]. The USPSTF also recommends that routine screening begin at age 60 for women at increased risk for osteoporotic fractures, including those with low body weight. Questions remain about how frequently women should be screened and when to stop offering bone densitometry. Varying recommendations for screening from several expert groups are presented in a table (table 4). (See"Screening for osteoporosis".)
The American College of Physicians recommends periodic assessment of men for risk factors for osteoporosis (low body weight, physical inactivity, chronic glucocorticoid therapy, previous fragility fracture, hypogonadism) and DEXA scanning for men who are at increased risk and are candidates for drug treatment [98]. ACOVE authors also recommend offering DEXA scanning to men over age 65 at high risk of osteoporosis [99]. (See "Screening for osteoporosis".)
Abdominal aortic aneurysm — Screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) with a one-time abdominal ultrasound examination has been shown to decrease aneurysm-related deaths and all-cause mortality in men [100,101]. Because the prevalence of AAA is lower in women, screening has not been shown to be effective in women [102].
Smoking increases the risk for AAA. One-time ultrasonography screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is recommended by several organizations (the USPSTF and the American Heart Association) for men ages 65 to 75 who have ever smoked. The USPSTF recommends against routine screening for AAA in women and made no recommendation for or against screening for AAA in men ages 65 to 75 who have never smoked. We also recommend screening at ages 65 to 75 for those who have never smoked but who have a first-degree relative who required repair of an AAA. (See "Screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm".)
Aneurysmal repair should be considered for asymptomatic aneurysms that are more than twice the size of the normal segment and for aneurysms with enlarging diameter at follow-up. (See "Management of asymptomatic abdominal aortic aneurysm".)
TERTIARY PREVENTION
Functional assessment and geriatric evaluation — Impairment in activities of daily living is associated with an increased risk of falls, depression, institutionalization, and death in the affected older adult [103,104]. Obtaining a history of functional status, with particular attention to activities of daily living (eg, bathing, toileting, grooming, meal preparation) allows the clinician to focus in on potential problem areas. Asking questions targeted at specific conditions that impact function and quality of life may well reduce the morbidity related to these problems (table 5). In addition, measurement of gait speed identifies older adults at high risk of functional decline and poor health [105]. A gait speed faster than 1 meter/second suggests better than average life expectancy.
Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment (CGA) can provide a more formal means of identifying key problems and can inform interventions that result in reduced functional decline and improved quality of life [106,107]. However, CGA can be impractical and time consuming in the primary care setting.
The following sections identify key components of the CGA and other practical suggestions for identification of common problems. (See "Comprehensive geriatric assessment".)
Cognitive assessment — The prevalence of dementia increases with age, with estimates ranging from 20 to 50 percent after age 85 [108,109]. Early or mild dementia may remain undetected without specific screening [110]. No evidence exists that screening for early or mild dementia results in improved clinical outcomes [111]. (See "Evaluation of cognitive impairment and dementia".)
A number of instruments, including the Mini Mental Status Examination (MMSE), Clock Drawing Test, Mini-Cog and Memory Impairment Screen, are validated screening tools [111,112]. Validated instruments also exist for collecting data regarding patient function from a relative or caregiver [113].
There is lack of consensus on the value of screening. Vulnerable older adults may benefit from screening if early identification results in preservation of function and increased attention to safety, behavioral, and caregiver issues [112,114].
The USPSTF and the American Academy of Neurology (AAN) do not support screening asymptomatic older adults for dementia [111,115,116]. We suggest that physicians perform targeted screening for older adults with memory complaints and/or newly recognized functional impairment, either self-expressed or noted by a caregiver.
Depression — Late-life depression often goes undetected and has a significant adverse impact on quality of life, outcomes of medical disease, healthcare utilization, morbidity, and mortality [117]. Suicide rates are almost twice as high in the older adult compared with the general population, with the rate highest for white men over 85 years of age.
The overwhelming majority of older adults with depression initially present to primary care, often with somatic complaints. Among older adults, depression can present atypically with cognitive, functional, or sleep problems as well as complaints of fatigue or low energy [117,118].
Several short screening instruments have been developed and validated for screening for depression in older adults. Asking two simple questions about mood and anhedonia ("Over the past two weeks have you felt down, depressed, or hopeless?" and "Over the past two weeks have you felt little interest or pleasure in doing things?") may be as effective a screening tool for depression as longer instruments. Any positive screening tests should trigger a full diagnostic interview. (See "Diagnosis and management of late-life depression".)
The USPSTF and ACOVE authors recommend screening all adults for depression, although the optimal screening interval is unknown [119,120]. They also emphasize the importance of having systems in place to provide feedback of screening results, a readily accessible means of making accurate diagnosis, and a mechanism for providing treatment and careful follow-up.
Vision screening — Decreased visual acuity increases fall risk and was an independent predictor of all-cause mortality in one study. It has not been determined if correcting visual impairments would reduce mortality [121].
The National Long-Term Care Survey (NLTCS) found that more regular eye examinations correlated with lower probability of low vision or blindness and improved functional status in a sample of 14,215 Medicare beneficiaries [122]. However, a systematic review found no evidence that screening by self-reported history of visual problems improves vision in older adults [123]. Several randomized trials of older adults seen in primary care found that vision screening (usually Snellen chart testing for visual acuity) was not more effective than no screening or usual care [124-126], and one trial found that optometry screening increased the risk for falls in frail older individuals [127].
Cataract surgery has been shown to improve cognition, depression, and vision-related quality of life in older patients with cataracts [128]. Early intervention for age-related macular degeneration seems to be beneficial. (See "Age-related macular degeneration: Treatment and prevention".)
Given the implications for function and safety, the ACOVE authors suggest a general ophthalmologic examination every one to two years, acknowledging the lack of prospective data to support this recommendation [129]. A systematic review of randomized trials, prepared for the USPSTF, concluded that further studies are needed to understand why trials of vision screening have not shown benefit [130]. The 1996 USPSTF guidelines recommended Snellen acuity testing in older adults, but in the 2009 revision the USPSTF concluded that evidence is insufficient to determine whether screening older adults for visual impairment improves functional outcomes [131].
Recommendations for glaucoma screening vary by organization. There is general agreement that older patients should be screened every one to two years by an eye professional [132]; the appropriate age to initiate screening is not certain, and may depend on risk factors including positive family history and African Americans. (See "Open-angle glaucoma: Epidemiology, clinical presentation, and diagnosis", section on 'Screening'.)
Hearing loss — Significant changes in vision and hearing occur in most patients as they age. Hearing loss is the third most common ailment, after hypertension and arthritis, to afflict older adults. Hearing loss is associated with depression, social isolation, poor self-esteem, increased hospitalizations, cognitive decline, and functional disability [133-136]. Patient inquiry is a rapid and inexpensive way to screen for hearing loss. While pure tone audiometry is the reference standard for screening hearing, a whispered voice test is both sensitive and specific [137]. (See "Evaluation of hearing loss in adults", section on 'Office hearing evaluation' and "Presbycusis".)
An evidence review to support a recommendation from the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) found that either the whispered voice test at two feet or a single question regarding perceived hearing loss were nearly as effective as a formal hearing questionnaire or use of a tone-emitting otoscope for the detection of hearing loss [138]. Additionally, a randomized controlled trial in an older US veteran population demonstrated that patients screened with a combination of a questionnaire and a tone-emitting otoscope, compared with either assessment alone, had higher adherence to referral to audiology and use of hearing aids at one year (see "Evaluation of hearing loss in adults", section on 'Office hearing evaluation') [139]. In 2012, however, the USPSTF concluded that there was insufficient evidence to determine the balance of benefits and harms of screening for hearing loss in asymptomatic older adults aged 50 years or older [140]. Despite the lack of convincing evidence of ultimate benefit, we suggest that primary providers screen adults over 65, particularly vulnerable elders at risk for functional decline, hospitalization, or cognitive problems, based on the simplicity and effectiveness of screening tools and the association of hearing loss with significant adverse outcomes [134].
Nutrition — Many major authorities on health care maintenance, including the Canadian Task Force, the American College of Physicians (ACP) [141], and the American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP), recommend that clinicians routinely provide nutritional assessment and counseling to their patients. A mini-nutritional assessment tool has been developed to help the clinician determine patients who may need nutritional support and counseling (figure 3).
Approximately 15 percent of older outpatients and half of the hospitalized older adults are malnourished [142]. Despite the clear relationship between undernutrition and increased morbidity and mortality [143], there are no well-validated general laboratory screens for this condition. A combination of serial weight measurements obtained in the office and inquiry about changing appetite are likely the most useful methods of assessing nutritional status in older patients.
Vulnerable older adults with an involuntary weight loss of 10 percent or more in less than a year should undergo further evaluation for undernutrition, possible medical or medication-related causes, dental status, food security, food related functional status, appetite and intake, swallow ability, and previous dietary restrictions [144]. (See"Geriatric nutrition: Nutritional issues in older adults".)
Vitamin D — Although the large Women's Health Initiative found that calcium and vitamin D was not effective in reducing fractures in healthy postmenopausal women over a seven year follow-up [145], meta-analysis of eight trials found that vitamin D with calcium decreased the relative risk (RR) for hip fractures (RR 0.84, 95% CI 0.73-0.96) [146]. Another meta-analysis found a significant reduction in the incidence of hip (RR 0.70, 95% CI 0.58-0.86) and nonvertebral (RR 0.86, 95% CI 0.76-0.96) fracture in individuals with a median vitamin D intake of 800 IU daily, compared with controls who took placebo or calcium alone [147].
A growing evidence base has identified the high prevalence of vitamin D deficiency (<30 ng/mL) among older adults and important health implications [148]. Vitamin D reduces the relative risk of falls by 22 percent [149]. The daily intake of vitamin D in older adults should be at least 800 to 1000 IU. At least 1.2 g of elemental calcium in the diet or as a supplement is also recommended. (See "Calcium and vitamin D supplementation in osteoporosis" and "Falls: Prevention in community-dwelling older persons".)
Multivitamins — No prospective randomized data supports an effect of multivitamins on morbidity or mortality. Multivitamin supplementation has the potential to provide benefit for those older individuals whose nutritional intake is insufficient. However, observational studies have suggested that multivitamin supplements do not decrease the risk for cancer or cardiovascular disease, and one large cohort study suggested the possibility of increased mortality in healthy older women who reported taking vitamin supplements [150]. (See "Vitamin supplementation in disease prevention".)
Falls and mobility — Approximately 30 percent of noninstitutionalized older adults fall each year [151]. The annual incidence of falls approaches 50 percent in patients over 80 years of age [152]. Five percent of falls in older adults result in fracture or hospitalization.
Factors contributing to falls include age-related postural changes, decreased vision, cognitive impairment, certain medications (particularly anticholinergic, psychotropic, and cardiovascular medications), diseases affecting muscle strength and coordination, and environmental factors [153]. Effective interventions for people with a history of falls or who are at risk for falling involve addressing multiple contributing factors (table 6 and algorithm 1) [154]. (See "Falls in older persons: Risk factors and patient evaluation".)
Providers should regularly inquire about the occurrence of recent falls in older patients [155]. For patients who report falling, basic assessment should include review of circumstances of the fall(s), measure of orthostatic vital signs, visual acuity testing, cognitive evaluation, and gait and balance assessment (algorithm 1) [155-157].
A straightforward physical examination maneuver called the "Get Up and Go" test has been described [158] (table 7). In this test, the patient is instructed to arise from a sitting position, walk 10 feet, turn, and return to the chair to sit. A requirement of more than 16 seconds to complete the process, or observation of postural instability or gait impairment, suggests an increased risk of falling [159].
Providers should also review all medications (with particular attention to hypnotic and other psychotropic drugs) for possible causative agents and inquiry about home safety. Appropriate patients should be evaluated for assistive devices and a supervised exercise program [160]. (See "Falls: Prevention in community-dwelling older persons".)
Incontinence — Urinary incontinence (UI) causes major social and emotional distress in older adults and is a major factor in nursing home placement. UI is estimated to affect 11 to 34 percent of older men and 17 to 55 percent of older women [161]. Diabetes approximately doubles the risk for severe incontinence in women [162]. Continence problems are frequently treatable [163] but are often not raised by patients as a concern [164].
A targeted history and physical examination can often identify the cause of UI and lead to appropriate intervention. ACOVE authors recommend asking about and documenting the presence or absence of UI biannually, and determining whether the UI, if present, is bothersome to the patient or caregiver [165]. Appropriate assessment includes questions to determine UI onset (acute versus chronic), type (eg, stress, urge, overflow, mixed), and precipitants (eg, cough, medication use). A targeted physical might include assessment for fluid overload, genital and rectal examination, and neurologic evaluation. Urine and blood tests are indicated to evaluate for infection, metabolic causes, renal dysfunction, and possible vitamin B12 deficiency. Routine urodynamic testing is not recommended. (See "Approach to women with urinary incontinence" and"Treatment and prevention of urinary incontinence in women".)
MEDICATION USE — Problems related to medication use are common in older adults. Adults over age 65 in the United States take an average of three to five medications [166]. Use of multiple medications increases the risk for drug-drug interactions and associated adverse drug events. Altered pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in older adults contribute to adverse drug events, a common cause of hospitalization and morbidity in older patients [167]. (See "Drug prescribing for older adults".)
Evidence-based recommendations on medication management, evaluated by ACOVE authors, include [25]:
●Maintain an up-to-date medication list, including over-the counters and herbals.
●Comprehensively review medications at least once annually (if not at every visit) and after all hospitalizations. A clear indication for each medication, and documentation of response to therapy (particularly for chronic conditions), should be included.
●Assess for duplication, drug-drug or drug-disease interactions, adherence, and affordability.
●Assess for specific classes of medications commonly associated with adverse events: warfarin, analgesics (particularly narcotics and NSAIDs), antihypertensives (particularly ACE inhibitors and diuretics), insulin and hypoglycemic agents, and any psychotropics.
●Minimize or avoid use of anticholinergic medications which present specific risks.
The Beer’s Criteria for Potentially Inappropriate Medication Use in Older Adults, updated in 2012, also provides a list of commonly encountered problem medications [168].
DRIVING — Adults over age 70 suffer more motor vehicle accidents (MVA) and more fatal driver and pedestrian accidents per one million miles driven than middle-aged drivers. This is likely a result of factors such as a decline in visual acuity, hearing, and psychomotor skills [169]. The American Medical Association (AMA) offers a specific online publication to guide assessment of the older driver [170]. (See "Approach to the evaluation of older drivers".)
A diagnosis of dementia independently increases the risk of an MVA (OR 2.4 to 4.7) [171]. Clinicians should discuss driving with all patients diagnosed with dementia and either recommend stopping driving or refer for formal driving assessment by occupational therapy. Specific reporting laws vary by state. The American Academy of Neurology has issued guidelines for driving in patients with Alzheimer disease based upon the clinical dementia rating [172]. (See "Safety and societal issues related to dementia".)
FINANCIAL AND SOCIAL SUPPORT — The older adult US population varies widely in measures of wealth and social support. While the overall rate of poverty among adults over age 65 has declined over the last 50 years, 10 percent of older adults still live at or below the poverty line, with higher rates among blacks (24 percent) and Hispanics (21 percent) [1].
Older adults also suffer from social isolation, due to functional limitations, and lack of relatives, friends, or organizations to provide physical or emotional support needed to maintain independence and well-being. Social isolation and poverty are associated with high rates of depression, anxiety, disability, and self-rated poor health [173].
Providers should screen for problems with financial and social resources as these issues have direct implications for health status and well-being. Most communities have assistance available through Area Agencies on Aging or other municipal organizations. Information can be gathered online at eldercare.gov.
ELDER MISTREATMENT — Elder mistreatment has been reported in 3 to 8 percent of the older adult population in the US [174]. A variety of forms of neglect or physical abuse (physical, sexual, psychological, financial, neglect) can result in adverse health outcomes for older victims, including increased mortality [175]. (See "Elder mistreatment: Abuse, neglect, and financial exploitation".)
Victims themselves are unlikely to report instances of abuse, making it difficult to address issues in the clinical setting. Older adults who are noted to have contusions, burns, bite marks, genital or rectal trauma, pressure ulcers, or a BMI <17.5 without clinical explanation should be asked about mistreatment or referred to social work services [3]. Available screening tools may also help clinicians discriminate cases of abuse or neglect. The American Medical Association and the USPSTF recommend that physicians routinely ask older patients direct, specific questions about abuse [119,176], although the USPSTF finds insufficient evidence to recommend for or against the use of screening instruments [119].
ADVANCE DIRECTIVES AND HEALTH CARE PROXY — A discussion of end-of-life care is well-suited to the health maintenance examination when the focus may be less on specific disease and more on prevention and planning. Older patients may experience periods of altered sensorium or cognitive impairment and become unable to participate in their financial or health care decisions. Powers of attorney, living wills, advanced directives, and guardianship documents become important in these situations.
A power of attorney designates a surrogate who is authorized to manage a patient's financial affairs. A health care power of attorney designates a representative to make health care choices for the patients. For patients who have not created a health care power of attorney, the spouse or other first-degree relative typically is the default surrogate decision-maker. The patient's preferences are sometimes detailed in a living will or other more detailed advance directive. This document may address situations in which the patient has a terminal illness, persistent vegetative state, or progressive neurologic condition and can include explicit directions for care management including withdrawal or withholding specific measures such as artificial nutrition or hydration. If no surrogate is designated and next-of-kin is not available, guardianship may be obtained. Guardianship is a legal proceeding whereby the court appoints a surrogate decision-maker. (See "Ethical issues in palliative care and near the end of life".)
MEDICARE AND PREVENTIVE VISITS — In 2005, the Medicare Modernization Act (MMA) authorized full payment for an Initial Preventive Physical Examination (IPPE), also known as the “Welcome to Medicare Preventive Visit.”  
This examination is for new Medicare beneficiaries and is focused on identifying and mitigating health risks, and educating patients about available preventive services. Updated in 2011, a qualifying IPPE requires performance of seven key components, including:
●Medical and surgical history
●Risk factors for depression or other mood disorders
●Functional ability and safety
●Physical exam to include height, weight, BMI, blood pressure, visual acuity, and other relevant elements
●End-of-life planning
●Education, counseling, and referral based on issues identified
●Orientation to available preventive services
As a part of its documentation, the visit results in a written plan shared with patients detailing recommendations and referrals. The MMA legislation also provides for a follow-up Annual Wellness Visit (AWV) every 12 months to continue to monitor and build upon the plan created as part of the IPPE.
A brief written guide to the IPPE is available online from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid (CMS) at http://www.cms.gov/Outreach-and-Education/Medicare-Learning-Network-MLN/MLNProducts/downloads/MPS_QRI_IPPE001a.pdf.
RESOURCES — For a number of years, the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) has developed and revised specific clinical recommendations regarding health maintenance for all populations in the US [119].
Over the last decade, several resources have emerged to define priorities for prevention and promotion specifically among older adults. Healthy People 2010 (HP2010) defines specific targets for the older adult population nationwide [177]. The Centers for Disease Control (CDC), with the support of the Merck Foundation, published its annual State of Aging report, which focuses on specific problem areas for intervention and cites the HP2010 goals [1].
The Assessing Care of Vulnerable Elders (ACOVE-3) project identifies quality indicators, including routine health maintenance, in the care of older adults, with a particular focus for those in frail health [178].
Guidelines with regard to interval screening for specific malignancies are available from the USPSTF and from the American Cancer Society (ACS) [50,119] and others. ACS recommendations are generally more supportive of cancer screening programs than are those of other groups.
The American Geriatric Society offers an online archive of information related to geriatric screening and health maintenance issues [179].
Information on legal issues and the older patient is available from the National Academy of Elder Law Attorneys at www.naela.org.
PATIENT RESOURCES — The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality has prepared a booklet for older adults called "The Pocket Guide to Staying Healthy at 50+." It is available on the web at www.ahrq.gov/ppip/50plus.
Through its Health in Aging Foundation, the American Geriatrics Society has created an informational website for patients and carers at www.healthinaging.org.
The National Institute on Aging provides free pamphlets, as part of its Age Pages series, on other common issues in older adults. They are available atwww.niapublications.org/shopdisplayproducts.asp?id=45&cat=All+Age+Pages.
Information for patients about the Medicare IPPE is available at http://www.medicare.gov/coverage/preventive-visit-and-yearly-wellness-exams.html.
INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS — UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, “The Basics” and “Beyond the Basics.” The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5th to 6th grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10th to 12th grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.
Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles on a variety of subjects by searching on “patient info” and the keyword(s) of interest.)
●Basics topic (see "Patient information: Preventive healthcare for older adults (The Basics)")
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
●Decline in function and loss of independence are NOT an inevitable consequence of aging. (See 'Introduction' above.)
●Multiple age-related conditions are amenable to prevention or amelioration with screening, counseling, and appropriate intervention. A summary of recommendations for specific conditions is presented in a table (table 1). (See 'Primary Prevention' above and 'Secondary Prevention' above and 'Tertiary Prevention' above.)

