Classification of acute myeloid leukemia
INTRODUCTION — Acute myeloid leukemia (AML, also known as acute myelogenous leukemia and, less commonly, as acute non-lymphocytic leukemia) consists of a group of relatively well-defined hematopoietic neoplasms involving precursor cells committed to the myeloid line of cellular development (ie, those giving rise to granulocytic, monocytic, erythroid, or megakaryocytic elements).

AML is characterized by a clonal proliferation of myeloid precursors with a reduced capacity to differentiate into more mature cellular elements. As a result, there is an accumulation of leukemic blasts or immature forms in the bone marrow, peripheral blood, and occasionally in other tissues, with a variable reduction in the production of normal red blood cells, platelets, and mature granulocytes. The increased production of malignant cells, along with a reduction in these mature elements, results in a variety of systemic consequences including anemia, bleeding, and an increased risk of infection. (See "Clinical manifestations, pathologic features, and diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia" and "Pathogenesis of acute myeloid leukemia".)

Following diagnosis, AML is classified using the World Health Organization (WHO) classification system based upon a combination of morphology, immunophenotype, genetics, and clinical features [1]. The classification attempts to identify biologic entities in the hopes that future work will elucidate molecular pathways that might be amenable to targeted therapies.

There are four main groups of AML recognized in this classification system [1,2]:

●AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities — 11 percent
●AML with myelodysplasia-related features — 6 percent
●Therapy-related AML and MDS — 2 percent
●AML, not otherwise specified — 81 percent
The classification of AML using the WHO classification system will be presented here. The presenting signs and symptoms and diagnosis of AML are discussed separately as are the prognosis, cytogenetics, treatment, and complications of AML. Issues related to one of the AML variants, acute promyelocytic leukemia (AML-M3), are also discussed separately. (See "Clinical manifestations, pathologic features, and diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia" and "Prognosis of acute myeloid leukemia" and "Cytogenetics in acute myeloid leukemia" and "Induction therapy for acute myeloid leukemia in younger adults" and "Treatment of acute myeloid leukemia in older adults" and "Overview of the complications of acute myeloid leukemia" and "Clinical manifestations, pathologic features, and diagnosis of acute promyelocytic leukemia in adults".)

AML WITH RECURRENT GENETIC ABNORMALITIES — The WHO category “AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities” accounts for approximately 11 percent of AML cases [1,2]. It contains AML variants that contain genetic abnormalities of prognostic significance. There are seven defined structural abnormalities that define specific AML subtypes. In addition, there are two provisional entities identified at the molecular level (mutated NPM1 and mutated CEBPA).

Defined structural abnormalities

AML with t(8;21)(q22;q22); RUNX1-RUNX1T1 — The balanced translocation t(8;21)(q22;q22), RUNX1-RUNX1T1 (previously AML1-ETO), is seen in approximately 7 percent of adults with newly diagnosed AML (figure 1) [3]; it is also the most frequent abnormality in children with AML [4]. It is one of the three cytogenetic abnormalities in AML which, if found, result in the diagnosis of AML regardless of the bone marrow blast count [5].

The t(8;21) identifies a morphologically and clinically distinct subset with the following features [6,7]:

●The myeloblasts tend to have indented nuclei.
●The cytoplasm is generally basophilic with a prominent paranuclear hof that may contain a few azurophilic granules.
●Promyelocytes, myelocytes, and metamyelocytes are often prominent and may be large; their cytoplasm has a waxy, orange appearance and lacks a granular texture in Romanowsky-stained specimens.
●Auer rods are easily identified, and several may be present in a single cell.
●Bone marrow eosinophilia is common.
Other morphologic features that suggest this diagnosis include blasts with long thin Auer rods, and maturation of the blasts to abnormal mature granulocytic elements with salmon colored cytoplasm with blue rims, and cytoplasmic globules, or Chediak-Higashi-like granules. This leukemia frequently has myeloid markers, but can also express CD19 and CD56. The malignant cells in some of these patients appear cytogenetically normal or contain only a detectable -Y or del(9q) [8]. However, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) or reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) methods will demonstrate the cryptic RUNX1-RUNX1T1 rearrangement.

The leukemia is associated with a more favorable prognosis. The presence of c-KIT mutations is an adverse prognostic features in patients with t(8;21). Surprisingly, patients can have transcripts of the RUNX1-RUNX1T1 detected by RT-PCR even when they have been in remission for many years. Further details regarding this translocation are presented separately. (See "Cytogenetics in acute myeloid leukemia", section on '8;21 translocation in AML'.)

AML with inv(16)(p13.1q22) or t(16;16)(p13.1;q22); CBFB-MYH11 — Abnormalities of chromosome 16 are seen in approximately 7 percent of adults with newly diagnosed AML (figure 1) [3]. One of these abnormalities, AML with inv(16)(p13.1q22) or t(16;16)(p13.1;q22), was previously classified under acute myelomonocytic leukemia (AMML, FAB M4Eo). This leukemia occurs in younger patients and can present as an extramedullary myeloid sarcoma.  

Morphologically, this leukemia has myeloblasts, a significant monocytic component that may be non-specific esterase reaction-negative, and variable numbers of abnormal immature eosinophils that have atypical purple-violet granules in addition to eosinophilic granules in the cytoplasm (picture 1 and picture 2). In typical cases, the bone marrow demonstrates abnormalities of the eosinophils in addition to the typical morphologic features of AML. In particular, the eosinophils are seen at all stages of maturation with no significant signs of maturation arrest, but with immature eosinophilic granules seen in the promyelocyte and myelocyte stages of development [5]. These immature granules are typically larger than normal and purple-violet in color. They may be so prominent that they obscure the cell morphology. While these morphologic changes are typical for this disorder, some patients with the CBFB/MYH11 fusion gene do not have these abnormalities in most of their bone marrow eosinophils [9].

This leukemia is associated with a more favorable prognosis although cases with an additional c-KIT mutation may do more poorly [10]. Further details regarding this translocation are presented separately. (See "Cytogenetics in acute myeloid leukemia", section on 'Inv(16) and t(16;16)'.)

APL with t(15;17)(q24.1;q21.1); PML-RARA — Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL, previously called AML-M3) is characterized by the balanced translocation t(15;17)(q24.1;q21.1) (figure 1) [11,12]. This rearrangement is seen in 13 percent of newly diagnosed AML and is highly specific for APL [3].

APL is a unique clinicopathological entity characterized by the infiltration of the bone marrow by promyelocytes in association with clinical or laboratory evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and fibrinolysis, which may worsen during the initial cytolytic response to chemotherapy. A characteristic folded, reniform (kidney-shaped), or bilobed nucleus is invariably found in some of the promyelocytes; coarse azurophilic granules and multiple Auer rods are also common (picture 3) [7,11]. The microgranular variant of APL differs from the more frequent hypergranular type in that the cytoplasmic granules in the leukemia cells are smaller and sometimes beneath the limit of resolution of the light microscope [7,11]. The diagnosis of APL is presented in more detail separately. (See "Clinical manifestations, pathologic features, and diagnosis of acute promyelocytic leukemia in adults".)

APL represents a medical emergency with a high rate of early mortality, but, if managed appropriately, usually has a favorable outcome. Further details regarding this translocation and the management of APL are presented separately. (See "Cytogenetics in acute myeloid leukemia", section on '15;17 translocation in APL' and "Initial treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia in adults".)

AML with t(9;11)(p22;q23); MLLT3-MLL — Rearrangements of 11q are seen in approximately 6 percent of young adults with newly diagnosed AML and up to 12 percent of children with AML [3,5]. The t(9;11) translocation can present with disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), and high white cell counts with gingival or skin infiltration. Morphologically, monoblasts and promonocytes usually predominate and show strong positive non-specific esterase reactions. The monoblasts often lack myeloperoxidase reactivity. AML with t(9;11)(p22;q23), MLLT3-MLL has an intermediate prognosis. Further details regarding translocations involving MLL are presented separately. (See "Cytogenetics in acute myeloid leukemia", section on 'Rearrangements of 11q23'.)

AML with t(6;9)(p23;q34); DEK-NUP214 — AML with t(6;9)(p23;q34), DEK-NUP214, is seen in approximately 1 percent of adults and approximately 10 percent of children with newly diagnosed AML [3,13]. This subtype of AML typically presents with variable morphology, basophilia, pancytopenia, and single or multilineage dysplasia [5,14]. The tumor cells typically express CD13, CD33, CD38, CD45, and HLA-DR. There is a high incidence of FLT3 internal tandem duplications. AML with t(6;9)(p23;q34); DEK-NUP214 has a poor prognosis. Further details regarding this translocation are presented separately. (See "Cytogenetics in acute myeloid leukemia", section on 't(6;9)'.)

AML with inv(3)(q21q26.2) or t(3;3)(q21;q26.2); RPN1-EVI1 — The t(3;3) and inv(3) account for approximately 1 percent of AML cases [3]. This abnormality is seen in de novo AML and in therapy-related MDS/AML. Patients are anemic but may have normal or elevated platelet counts. It is frequently associated with dysplasia, which is quite prominent in the megakaryocytic lineage. Cytogenetic abnormalities of 3q are associated with increased atypical megakaryocytes in the bone marrow [15-17]. These cytogenetic abnormalities are associated with aggressive disease and a short survival time. Further details regarding this translocation are presented separately. (See "Cytogenetics in acute myeloid leukemia", section on 't(3;3) and inv(3) in AML with thrombocytosis'.)

AML (megakaryoblastic) with t(1;22)(p13;q13); RBM15-MKL1 — AML with the t(1;22)(p13;q13), RBM15-MKL1, is a rare entity accounting for <0.5 percent of cases of newly diagnosed AML [3,5]. It is typically a megakaryoblastic process occurring in infants, although it is not seen in patients with Down syndrome. Most patients present with marked hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, thrombocytopenia, and a moderately elevated white cell count [18]. Sometimes it can present as a mass and mimic sarcoma. Morphologically, the cells resemble those of acute megakaryoblastic leukemia. (See "Cytogenetics in acute myeloid leukemia", section on 't(1;22)' and 'Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia' below.)

AML with gene mutations

AML with mutated NPM1 — AML with mutations of the nucleophosmin gene (NPM1) are considered as a provisional entity [18]. The mutation is seen in approximately one-third of all cases of AML and does not constitute a unique group. The presence of the NPM1 mutation confers a better prognosis, although when seen in conjunction with mutations in FLT3, the prognosis is inferior. Patients with NPM1 mutations and evidence of multilineage dysplasia (MLD) appear to have a similar outcome to those with NPM1 mutations and no MLD [19]. This is discussed in more detail separately. (See "Prognosis of acute myeloid leukemia", section on 'Nucleophosmin gene'.)

AML with mutated CEBPA — Mutation in the CEBPA (CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha) gene are seen in approximately 6 to 15 percent of AML, commonly in cases with a normal karyotype. Cases with this mutation are associated with a better prognosis, although when seen in conjunction with mutations in FLT3, the prognosis is inferior. This is discussed in more detail separately. (See "Prognosis of acute myeloid leukemia", section on 'CEBPA gene' and "Prognosis of acute myeloid leukemia", section on 'FLT3 gene'.)

AML WITH MDS-RELATED FEATURES — AML with myelodysplasia-related features (previously called AML with multilineage dysplasia) is defined by cases that fit the criteria for a diagnosis of AML (≥20 percent blasts), without a history of prior cytotoxic therapy for an unrelated disease, with one or more of the following three characteristics associated with myelodysplasia [18,20]. (See "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of the myelodysplastic syndromes".)

●AML that evolves from previously documented myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS).
●AML that demonstrates MDS-related cytogenetic abnormalities, such as monosomy 5 or del(5q), monosomy 7 or del(7q), isochromosome 17p.
●AML with morphologically identified multilineage dysplasia, defined as dysplasia present in ≥50 percent of cells in two or more hematopoietic lineages.
The following are examples of dysplastic changes that may be seen in AML with MDS-related features:

●Dysplastic neutrophils that have hypogranular cytoplasm, hyposegmented nuclei (eg, pseudo-Pelger-Huet cells), and/or bizarrely segmented nuclei.
●Dysplastic erythrocytes that demonstrate megaloblastoid change, karyorrhexis, nuclear irregularity, nuclear fragmentation, multinucleation, ring sideroblasts, cytoplasmic vacuoles, and/or periodic acid-Schiff positivity.
●Dysplastic megakaryocytes that are small (ie, micro-megakaryocytes) or are of normal to large size with non-lobulated or multiple small widely separated nuclei.
Patients with AML who have a prior history of MDS or have MDS-related cytogenetic abnormalities have a poor outcome with conventional therapy. Such patients frequently demonstrate multilineage dysplasia (MLD). In contrast, the identification of MLD in the absence of these two features may not predict a poor outcome.

A retrospective analysis of 408 patients with AML with MDS-related features or AML, not otherwise specified (AML,NOS) examined the prognostic implication of these three diagnostic features [21]. Patients whose AML was categorized by the WHO classification as AML with MDS-related features based solely upon the presence of MLD had a similar median event-free survival (17 versus 16 months) and similar rates of three-year overall survival (57 versus 55 percent) as patients with AML,NOS. In comparison, MDS-related cytogenetics predicted an inferior outcome.

THERAPY-RELATED AML — The diagnosis of therapy-related myeloid neoplasm (t-MN) is made when evaluation of the peripheral blood and bone marrow demonstrates morphologic, immunophenotypic, and cytogenetic changes consistent with the diagnosis of AML, MDS, or MDS/MPN in a patient with prior exposure to cytotoxic agents. Details on the diagnosis and treatment of t-MN, including t-AML, are presented separately. (See "Therapy-related myeloid neoplasms: Acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome".)

AML NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFIED — Cases of AML that do not meet the criteria for the categories described above are classified as AML, not otherwise specified (NOS). These cases are further subclassified by morphology that is similar to that used in the previous French, American, and British (FAB) classification system (table 1 and table 2) [6,18]. This subclassification is described in the following sections.

Subclassification of patients with AML,NOS does not provide additional prognostic information at this time. An analysis of 5848 patients with newly diagnosed AML,NOS enrolled on cooperative group trials reported the following distribution of FAB subtypes [22]:

●AML with minimal differentiation (M0) — 6 percent
●AML without maturation (M1) — 25 percent
●AML with maturation (M2) — 28 percent
●Acute myelomonocytic leukemia (M4) — 21 percent
●Acute monoblastic and monocytic leukemia (M5) — 15 percent
●Acute erythroid leukemia (M6) — 4 percent
●Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (M7) — 1 percent
While an initial evaluation suggested worse outcomes among patients with M0 subtype, this difference was no longer present when cases of AML with mutated NPM1 and/or mutated CEBPA were excluded. M0 cases had a significantly lower incidence of NPM1 mutations, which are known to confer a better prognosis. Cases of AML,NOS are still subclassified for research purposes since response to as yet unidentified treatments may differ by subgroup.

AML with minimal differentiation — AML with minimal differentiation (equivalent to FAB M0) accounts for <5 percent of AML. In this leukemia, the blast cells are usually medium sized with a round or minimally indented nucleus, dispersed nuclear chromatin, and one or two nucleoli (picture 4) [23-25]. There are no cytoplasmic granules or Auer rods and they cannot be differentiated from acute lymphocytic leukemia based upon morphology alone. Although the blasts are negative for the myeloperoxidase (MPO) or Sudan black B (SBB) reactions, myeloid lineage is defined by the presence of myeloid associated markers. Most cases express antigens of early hematopoiesis (eg, CD34, CD38, HLA-DR) and the myeloid antigens CD13, CD117, and CD33. They lack antigens of more mature myeloid differentiation such as CD14, CD15, CD11b, and CD64, and can express the T cell marker CD7.

AML without maturation — AML without maturation (equivalent to FAB M1) accounts for 5 to 10 percent of AML. This type of AML is characterized by a high percentage of blasts (>90 percent of total cells) and fewer than 10 percent of cells showing differentiation past the blast stage [18]. The blasts in this leukemia are large cells with a high nuclear:cytoplasmic ratio with grayish blue cytoplasm and a nucleus containing one to two distinct nucleoli (picture 5). Unlike AML with minimal differentiation, at least 3 percent of the blasts stain for MPO and/or SBB, and some cases may demonstrate azurophilic granules and/or Auer rods. Many cases express antigens of early hematopoiesis (eg, CD34, CD38, HLA-DR), but also express one or more myeloid-associated antigens (eg, CD13, CD33, CD117). Markers of granulocytic maturation (eg, CD15, CD65) are not expressed in most cases.

AML with maturation — AML with maturation (equivalent to FAB M2) accounts for 10 percent of AML. The bone marrow contains blasts with and without azurophilic granules (picture 6) [18]. Auer rods are common. At least 10 percent of the bone marrow cells show differentiation past the blast stage to promyelocytes, myelocytes, and/or mature neutrophils. It is assumed that the maturing cells are part of the leukemic clone although this is difficult to prove. Eosinophil precursors, basophils, and mast cells may be increased. A fraction of blasts may express antigens of early hematopoiesis (eg, CD34, CD38, HLA-DR), but the majority of cells express myeloid-associated antigens (eg, CD13, CD33, CD65, CD11b, and CD15). Monocytic markers (eg, CD14, CD64) are usually negative.

Acute myelomonocytic leukemia — Acute myelomonocytic leukemia (equivalent to FAB M4) accounts for 5 to 10 percent of AML. This leukemia has at least 20 percent blasts (either myeloblasts, monoblasts, and/or promonocytes) in the bone marrow or blood. In addition to myeloblasts, there is a significant monocytic component, with monocytes and monocytic precursors accounting for at least 20 percent of the marrow cells [18]. The monocytes can be recognized morphologically or with the help of non-specific esterase reactions, or by immunophenotyping (with expression of CD14, CD11c, CD64 and lysozyme).

Acute monoblastic and monocytic leukemia — Acute monoblastic and monocytic leukemia (equivalent to FAB M5A and B) accounts for <5 percent of cases of AML each. The marrow is composed of an admixture of monoblasts, promonocytes, and monocytes with a minor percentage of neutrophils (picture 1) [18]. Promonocytes are considered blast equivalents for determining the blast percentage. Auer rods are rare and hemophagocytosis may be present.

Almost all cases express the HLA-DR antigen of early hematopoiesis. Myeloid antigens are variably expressed and there is usually expression of at least two markers of monocytic differentiation (eg, CD14, CD4, CD11b, CD11c, CD64, CD68, CD36, and lysozyme). The terms monoblastic and monocytic leukemia are used depending upon the predominant component:

●In acute monoblastic leukemia, the vast majority of the cells (>80 percent) are monoblasts. Monoblasts are large with abundant moderately to intensely basophilic cytoplasm, which may demonstrate pseudopod formation, scattered fine azurophilic granules, and vacuoles. Nuclei are round with delicate lacy chromatin and one or more large prominent nucleoli (picture 7).
●In acute monocytic leukemia, promonocytes and mature monocytes predominate with less than 80 percent monoblasts. Promonocytes are large with less basophilic and sometimes more obviously granulated cytoplasm with occasional large azurophilic granules and vacuoles. The nucleus is irregular with a delicately convoluted configuration (picture 8 and picture 9) [26].
Acute erythroid leukemia — Acute erythroid leukemia (equivalent to FAB M6, erythroleukemia, or Di Guglielmo’s disease) accounts for <5 percent of AML. The erythroblasts do not express markers of myeloid lineage and do not stain with MPO [18]. They may express CD117 and do react with antibodies to hemoglobin A and glycophorin. It is notable that cases with prominent dysplasia might better be classified into the AML with myelodysplastic-related features category [27]. They typically have myelodysplastic associated cytogenetic changes as well. Two types of this leukemia are recognized, the erythroid/myeloid type and the "pure" type.

●In the erythroid/myeloid type, erythroid precursors account for more than 50 percent of the nucleated marrow elements and myeloblasts account for more than 20 percent of the non erythroid forms. The bone marrow is composed of erythroid precursors of all stages of maturation, often with a shift towards immaturity. Dysplastic changes are present with features of nuclear atypia, gigantism, and multinucleation, admixed with myeloblasts and dysplasia also in the granulocytic and megakaryocytic lineages (picture 10).
●In the "pure" form, erythroblasts, primarily at the pronormoblast stage predominate and account for >80 percent of the marrow cells. Sometimes they have vacuolization in the cytoplasm surrounding the nucleus. This has been referred to as a “pearl necklace”, and should not be confused with the vacuolated cells seen in Burkitt leukemia/lymphoma.
Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia — Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (equivalent to FAB M7) accounts for <5 percent of AML. The bone marrow is comprised of at least 20 percent blasts of which at least half are of megakaryocyte lineage [28-30]. Bone marrow fibrosis and a leukoerythroblastic blood picture without splenomegaly (previously called "acute myelofibrosis") may be present. Megakaryoblasts are differentiated from other blasts by virtue of either maturation to cells resembling normal megakaryocytes, or by special staining for the megakaryocytic markers CD41 or CD61 or for the products of megakaryocytes, such as von Willebrand factor or platelet type glycoproteins. Megakaryoblasts are medium to large cells with basophilic, often agranular cytoplasm that may have distinct cytoplasmic blebs or pseudopod formation. The nucleus is round, slightly irregular or indented with fine reticular chromatin and one to three nucleoli (picture 11). The megakaryoblasts are consistently negative for MPO, SBB, and naphthyl-ASD-chloroacetate esterase. Megakaryoblasts are not equivalent to micro-megakaryocytes, which are dysplastic but mature megakaryocytes.

Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia in infants and children may be associated with the presence of t(1;22) [31] and Down syndrome (trisomy 21) [32], and in adults with a high incidence of an antecedent hematologic disorder, myelodysplastic syndrome, and/or prior chemotherapy [30]. (See "Down syndrome: Clinical features and diagnosis", section on 'Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL)'.)

Those with t(1;22) are classified into the group with recurring genetic abnormalities, and those associated with Down syndrome are classified separately. Like erythroleukemia, many cases of acute megakaryoblastic leukemia in adults have prominent multilineage dysplasia and might better be classified into the AML with myelodysplastic-related features category. They also typically have myelodysplastic associated cytogenetic changes.

Acute basophilic leukemia — Acute basophilic leukemia accounts for <1 percent of AML. Blasts are of medium size with moderately basophilic cytoplasm containing a variable number of coarse basophilic granules that have metachromatic positivity with toluidine blue [18]. The nucleus is oval, round, or bilobed with dispersed chromatin and one to three prominent nucleoli and a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio. Dysplastic features may be present. Blast cells express myeloid markers (eg, CD13, CD33), CD123, CD203c, and CD11b, but do not express other monocytic markers. They are negative for CD117. Care should be taken not to mistake a case of acute basophilic leukemia for chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) or CML in blast crisis, as CML typically has increased basophils. If the t(6;9) is identified, the case is best classified in the group with recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities. (See 'AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities' above.)

Acute panmyelosis with myelofibrosis — Acute panmyelosis with myelofibrosis is a rare subtype of AML. This entity is incorporated into the AML category because of its association with increased blasts and its highly aggressive nature. The bone marrow is hypercellular and diffusely fibrotic with increased erythroid, granulocytic, and megakaryocytic precursors (panmyelosis) [18]. Blasts are increased but difficult to quantify since often the marrow cannot be aspirated. The blasts may be of different myeloid lineages including myeloblasts, erythroblasts, and megakaryoblasts. Unlike chronic or primary myelofibrosis, and because of the abrupt nature of the disease, patients do not have splenomegaly, extramedullary hematopoiesis or signs of this in the blood (eg, teardrop red blood cells and a leukoerythroblastic picture).

SUMMARY

●Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) consists of a group of relatively well-defined hematopoietic neoplasms involving precursor cells committed to the myeloid line of cellular development (ie, those giving rise to granulocytic, monocytic, erythroid, or megakaryocytic elements).
●Following diagnosis, AML is classified into four main groups using the World Health Organization classification system based upon a combination of morphology, immunophenotype, genetics, and clinical features. The classification attempts to identify biologic entities in the hopes that future work will elucidate molecular pathways that might be amenable to targeted therapies.
●AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities includes seven specific AML subtypes with defined structural abnormalities and two provisional entities identified at the molecular level (mutated NPM1 and mutated CEBPA). (See 'AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities' above.)
•The t(8;21) identifies a morphologically and clinically distinct subset of AML characterized by myeloblasts with basophilic cytoplasm, indented nuclei, and prominent Auer rods. (See 'AML with t(8;21)(q22;q22); RUNX1-RUNX1T1' above.)
•AML with inv(16)(p13.1q22) or t(16;16)(p13.1;q22) is characterized by myeloblasts with a significant monocytic component and abnormalities in the eosinophils. (See 'AML with inv(16)(p13.1q22) or t(16;16)(p13.1;q22); CBFB-MYH11' above.)
•The t(15;17) defines acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), which is characterized by the infiltration of the bone marrow by promyelocytes, often with a folded, reniform (kidney-shaped), or bilobed nucleus in association with clinical or laboratory evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation and fibrinolysis. (See 'APL with t(15;17)(q24.1;q21.1); PML-RARA' above.)
•The t(9;11) translocation can present with a high white count, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and gingival or skin infiltration. Morphologically, monoblasts and promonocytes usually predominate. (See 'AML with t(9;11)(p22;q23); MLLT3-MLL' above.)
•AML with t(6;9)(p23;q34), DEK-NUP214 typically presents with basophilia, pancytopenia, and dysplasia with circulating monoblasts and promonocytes. (See 'AML with t(6;9)(p23;q34); DEK-NUP214' above.)
•The t(3;3) and inv(3) is frequently associated with dysplasia, especially involving the megakaryocytic lineage. (See 'AML with inv(3)(q21q26.2) or t(3;3)(q21;q26.2); RPN1-EVI1' above.)
•AML with the t(1;22)(p13;q13), RBM15-MKL1 is a rare entity typically diagnosed in infants who present with marked hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, thrombocytopenia, and a moderately elevated white cell count. (See 'AML (megakaryoblastic) with t(1;22)(p13;q13); RBM15-MKL1' above.)
●AML with myelodysplasia-related features (previously called AML with multilineage dysplasia) includes cases that fit the criteria for a diagnosis of AML without a history of prior cytotoxic therapy that have evolved from previously documented myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), contain MDS-related cytogenetic abnormalities, and/or demonstrate multilineage dysplasia. (See 'AML with MDS-related features' above.)
●The diagnosis of therapy-related myeloid neoplasm (t-MN) is made when AML, MDS, or MDS/MPN is diagnosed in a patient with prior exposure to cytotoxic agents. (See "Therapy-related myeloid neoplasms: Acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome".)
●The vast majority of cases of AML do not meet the criteria for the categories described above and are classified as AML, not otherwise specified (NOS). These cases are further subclassified by morphology that is similar to that used in the previous French, American, and British (FAB) classification system (table 1 and table 2). (See 'AML not otherwise specified' above.)