Psychological aspects of pregnancy termination
INTRODUCTION — In the United States in 2008, there were 6.4 million pregnancies among 62 million women. Fifty percent of pregnancies were unintended and 19 percent of pregnancies resulted in pregnancy termination [1]. Advances in prenatal testing for fetal abnormalities has increased the number of terminations of intended pregnancies [2,3].

The psychological impact of pregnancy termination is controversial. The evidence regarding this issue is generally of low quality and study design is inconsistent [4]. In particular, many studies do not use validated mental health measures, pre-abortion mental status is often not controlled for, and the presence and type of comparison group are variable [5]. Available systematic reviews have reached opposing conclusions and concerns have been raised regarding methodology [4-7]. In addition, the circumstance of an unwanted pregnancy involves many other factors that are likely to be associated with emotional distress. Psychological responses to pregnancy termination often vary by social, cultural, religious, or legal context, so generalizations across populations are difficult to make [8,9].

The psychosocial aspects of pregnancy termination are reviewed here. Other issues regarding pregnancy termination are discussed separately. (See "Overview of pregnancy termination".)

EVIDENCE REGARDING POTENTIAL OUTCOMES — The evidence regarding the epidemiology of mental health outcomes following pregnancy termination for unintended pregnancy is reviewed in the sections that follow. Psychological outcomes of pregnancy termination due to fetal abnormalities are discussed in a separate section. (See 'Termination for fetal anomalies' below.)

Based upon existing evidence, it is known that many women struggle with decisions to end pregnancies. The conflicts and ambivalence regarding the abortion decision appear to occur mostly before the abortion [10]. While unintended pregnancy brings about a crisis and concomitant stress for many women, the pregnancy termination is commonly perceived as a resolution of the crisis leading to a sense of relief. Most women do not develop serious mental health disorders, such as depression [11,12].

Systematic reviews by professional societies, the American Psychological Association (APA) [4] and the United Kingdom National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health (NCCMH) [6], found no increase in the risk of mental health disorders associated with pregnancy termination.

In contrast, a meta-analysis of 22 studies found an 81 percent increased risk of mental health problems among women who had a prior abortion, with 10 percent of this risk attributable to abortion [7]. However, this analysis has been the subject of considerable controversy and did not provide an assessment of the quality of studies or control for previous mental health history [5,6,13].  

Anxiety — Many women experience anxiety symptoms just prior to pregnancy termination, but abortion is not associated with an increase in the long-term risk of anxiety symptoms. A literature review of 24 studies found that, in good quality studies, 40 to 45 percent of women planning an abortion had significant levels of anxiety [14]. One study reported that the most common factor associated with anxiety was anticipation of pain [15]. Most studies in the literature review found a decreased prevalence of anxiety in the month following pregnancy termination.

Regarding the long-term risk of anxiety, the best designed study was a cross-sectional analysis that included 3482 women with an unintended first pregnancy [16]. There was no significant difference in the rate of post-pregnancy anxiety symptoms (lasting six or more months) in women who had an abortion compared with those who had a delivery, after controlling for pre-pregnancy anxiety symptoms and rape experience.

Depression and suicide — There are conflicting data regarding the association of pregnancy termination with a long-term risk of depression and suicide. The studies that have addressed this question are mostly retrospective. In general, the highest quality studies have found no increase in the long-term risk of depression or suicide associated with induced abortion.

Depressive symptoms are present in some women (20 percent) following the diagnosis of pregnancy and prior to termination, based upon the better quality studies in a literature review of 24 studies [14].

Following abortion, women may experience positive emotions [12,17]. As an example, in one study of 292 women surveyed two weeks following pregnancy termination, the majority reported feeling happy (76 percent); the most frequent negative emotion was guilt (19 percent) [18].

There appears to be no long-term increase in the risk of depression associated with pregnancy termination, although there are conflicting data. Two retrospective studies regarding the risk of depression following abortion used the same data source, the United States National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, but reached different conclusions [19,20]. A systematic review that assessed study quality found that one of the studies was of higher quality, because it used the original coding system of the survey and had less risk of selection bias [21]. In that study (n = 1247), girls between age 14 to 21 years in 1979 were surveyed annually until 1992 [19]. After 1980, those with an unwanted first pregnancy who had undergone termination versus delivery had no significantly different risk of having depression, based upon a standardized depression scale (both groups had a 24 percent risk). Prior to 1980, participants who terminated a pregnancy were statistically significantly less likely than those who delivered to be at high risk of depression (24 versus 35 percent).  

The systematic review that assessed study quality found that there were no high quality data to support an increased risk of suicide associated with pregnancy termination [21].

A population-based retrospective cohort study of Danish women from 1995 to 2007 found a higher baseline rate of mental health disorders in women undergoing termination compared with childbirth, but did not find that the termination was associated with an increase in these disorders [22]. The study analyzed data regarding the rate for first psychiatric contact (outpatient diagnosis or psychiatric admission) in women and girls with a first pregnancy. For all mental health disorders, there was no significant difference in the rate of first psychiatric contact following termination compared with before the procedure (15.2 versus 14.6 per 1000 person-years; 1.5 versus 1.0 percent). In contrast, women who underwent childbirth had statistically significantly higher rates of psychiatric contact after compared with before delivery (6.7 versus 3.9 per 1000 person-years; 0.7 versus 0.3 percent). Regarding the risk of depression, a subset analysis of affective disorders was consistent with the findings for all mental health disorders [23].

Psychosis — A prospective cohort study (n = 13,261) found that women without a history of mental illness had a lower relative risk of psychosis after abortion than after childbirth, although rates of psychosis leading to hospitalization were similar [24]. Few studies specifically address abortion and psychosis.

Posttraumatic stress disorder — Some research has suggested a relationship between posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms and pregnancy termination [25,26]. Other research has indicated that common risk factors account for those symptoms, suggesting that prior mental health problems and history of sexual abuse are significant factors in both PTSD and abortion [27,28].

Regret — There have been few studies of presence or absence of regret following pregnancy termination, particularly including an appropriate comparison group. One study (n = 442) indicated that most women do not experience regret after abortion, but those who do tend to have a history of depression [29]. A large prospective cohort has examined the mental and physical health and socioeconomic consequences of receiving versus being denied an abortion. The study found that women who were turned away because they exceeded the gestational age limit at that clinic experienced more anger and regret than those who were still eligible and underwent an abortion [30].

Stigma — Many women are concerned about social stigma related to pregnancy termination [31,32]. As an example, in a study of 442 women followed for two years after pregnancy termination, 47 percent reported that others would disapprove of them as a result of their abortion and 44 percent felt they needed to keep the abortion a secret from family and/or friends [33]. Stigma may contribute to the internalization of negative perceptions of self, as well as negatively influence patient perception of the abortion experience [33,34].

Substance abuse — Studies have found that women who had multiple abortions are more likely to have a substance abuse disorder than women who had one or no abortions [16,35]. However, a prospective study that followed women for two years found that use of drugs other than marijuana was less likely among women who had an abortion than in those who were turned away from having an abortion because they exceeded the gestational age limit at that time and ultimately gave birth [36].

MODIFYING FACTORS — The degree of emotional distress in response to pregnancy termination may depend upon one or more of the following factors:

●Prior mental health status
●Social support
●Attitude toward pregnancy termination
●Maternal age
●Prior or current relationship violence  
Prior mental health status — Mental health status prior to pregnancy termination appears to be the most important risk factor for subsequent psychiatric symptoms or diagnoses [6,37]. A study attempted to address the shortcomings of appropriate comparison groups, inadequate measures of mental health outcomes and confounding factors. Their findings confirm that prior mental health is an important predictor of mental health following both pregnancy and abortion [38].

Social support — The psychological support available to a woman before and after pregnancy termination affects the woman's perception, experience, and future feelings about abortion. Studies have found that low perceived or anticipated social support is associated with an increased rate of negative emotion following pregnancy termination [4,6]. Relationship health, rather than marital status, appears to affect emotional response to abortion: most, but not all, studies have found that partner support is a key factor in reducing the risk of emotional distress [4,39,40]. One study found that poor support from the woman’s gynecologist was associated with severe emotional distress in women younger than age 25 years [39]. Emotional support may be provided by the woman’s partner, family, friends, or clinicians or counselors [41]. (See 'Counseling for women undergoing pregnancy termination' below.)  

Conversely, women who report pressure from a partner or friends as the reason for having a termination appear to be more likely to have symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) [25,42].

Socioeconomic status — Socioeconomic status has not been demonstrated to affect psychological responses to abortion. A Swedish study (n = 444) found that while dissatisfaction with social support after abortion was common, it did not vary among socioeconomic groups [43]. Another study found that having an abortion for “financial reasons” significantly correlated to a negative psychological response after the procedure, but this study did not compare women of differing socioeconomic status [42].

Attitude toward pregnancy termination — Ambivalence and a negative attitude toward abortion have been shown to be significant predictors of negative emotional responses post-abortion. As an example, in a prospective study (n = 80), a negative attitude toward abortion was associated with an increased rate of anxiety at both six months and five years after the procedure [42].

A woman may feel compelled to terminate an unintended pregnancy, despite a negative personal attitude toward pregnancy termination. This may make it difficult for her to accept her decision without anxiety and distress. Attitudes about abortion may be influenced by religious or legal factors [44].

Adolescents — A prospective two-year follow-up study of 360 adolescents enrolled at the time of seeking pregnancy testing found that the vast majority (95.5 percent) who chose to terminate an unplanned pregnancy reported no symptoms of psychological disturbance after the abortion and seemed to fare significantly better with regard to the completion of high school and economic well-being, particularly when they prevented a repeat pregnancy, compared to those who carried their pregnancies to term [45]. These findings also confirm the important role of post-abortion contraception.

A study which evaluated the emotional responses of minors [46] pre- and post-abortion found that adolescents did not differ from other age groups in their psychological reactions after an abortion, confirming the findings of one study for adolescents and abortion. This study found that, while young women reported similar levels of comfort after their abortions, their emotional states before their abortions, and the degree to which they felt pressured to have abortions, specifically by their partners rather than parents, were predictors of subsequent negative feelings after pregnancy termination.

Adolescents, particularly in states requiring parental involvement and judicial determinations of eligibility for abortion, are at greater risk of emotional distress [10].

Prior or current relationship violence — One study (n = 2525) found significant correlation between abortion and past experience of sexual abuse, relationship violence, or rape. When analysis controlled for this history of abuse and other socio-demographic factors, abortion was not correlated with poorer mental health [47].

An analysis of national comorbidity data demonstrated that, once risk factors were considered, abortion was not significantly related to suicidal ideation or depression. The analysis did find, however, that prior mental health status and gender-based violence experience were significant predictors of post-pregnancy mental health status [48]. A separate analysis of two national surveys (n = 9683) found no significant association between depression and termination after adjustment for socio-demographic factors. The effect of violence on depression remained significant even after adjustment [49]. Identifying, supporting, and referring women experiencing relationship violence is an effective intervention against further psychological consequences of that violence [50]. Termination counseling provides an opportune point of intervention in the clinic.

History of pregnancy termination — Studies indicate that women who report a history of multiple abortions also report a higher rate of prior mood and anxiety disorders than women having no abortions; these women also have a higher rate of physical or sexual abuse than women having one abortion [27,35]. As noted above, relationship violence and mental health history are significant predictors of both pre- and post-abortion mental health, and screening and referral for at-risk women is an appropriate intervention.

Current family size — Research indicates that women with greater numbers of children have more positive attitudes towards abortion [51]. Women who chose abortion because they had enough children report slightly better psychological responses two years post-procedure than women who chose abortion for other reasons [42].

Other factors — The impact of gestational age on psychological outcomes of elective pregnancy termination has not been determined. A systematic review of 11 comparative studies regarding termination at later gestation found studies to generally be of low quality and no studies that controlled for pre-termination mental health [52]. Most of these studies evaluated termination for fetal anomalies. Four studies that compared women who had an induced abortion in the second trimester or later with those who had other perinatal losses found no difference in mental health outcomes.

Medication abortion has now become a common technique, particularly for first trimester pregnancy termination. Some questions have been raised regarding whether mifepristone, the agent used in most medication abortions, may improve mood through its action as a glucocorticoid receptor blocker [53,54]. In addition, the patient experiences of surgical and medication abortion differ, which could theoretically affect emotional responses: one study (n = 86) found that medication abortion patients had a higher risk of developing PTSD than surgical abortion patients [26]. Two prospective studies, however, found that the technique for pregnancy termination was not associated with variation in psychological outcomes [17,53]. The larger of these studies (n = 219) was a prospective cohort study in which women underwent a first trimester medication or surgical abortion. Both groups showed a statistically significant decrease in both anxiety and depression from one month before to one month after the procedure. The pre-procedure anxiety score was statistically significantly lower in the medication group than in the surgery group [17].

COUNSELING FOR WOMEN UNDERGOING PREGNANCY TERMINATION — Counseling before and after pregnancy termination facilitates informed decision-making, provides emotional support, and helps to identify women who require additional psychological care. Counseling can also reduce likelihood of negative emotional experiences after an abortion [55]. A variety of approaches to counseling is available and resources are available for clinicians [56,57].

Counseling before termination

Source of counseling — Some women who are considering pregnancy termination go directly to an abortion clinic, while others seek the advice of their primary care clinician, gynecologist, midwife, or other health care providers.

Referring clinician — Referring clinicians can play an important role in counseling women regarding pregnancy termination [10]. An awareness of the potential emotional issues involved in this process is helpful in providing appropriate counseling and in identifying patients who may require additional psychological care. Some clinicians may be opposed to pregnancy termination. However, codes of medical ethics require clinicians to provide impartial information and referrals to patients. Regarding pregnancy termination, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) advises, “All health care providers must provide accurate and unbiased information so that patients can make informed decisions” [58]. The American College of Physicians (ACP) states, “As in any other medical situation, the physician has a duty to refer the patient to an appropriate source for the full range of options so that the patient's legal options are not constrained [59].”

A referring clinician should be able to provide contact information for abortion providers and should have a general knowledge of different options for pregnancy termination. A referral list based upon personal knowledge of colleagues and previous experiences of patients is immensely helpful to the woman and preferable to advising a patient to check a printed or online directory.

Clinicians should be aware that it may be difficult for a patient to bring up the subject of pregnancy termination and should approach the patient in a manner that puts the patient at ease and avoids a perception of stigma. As noted above, one study found that poor support from the woman’s gynecologist is associated with severe emotional distress in women younger than age 25 years [39]. (See 'Social support' above.)

Clinician or clinic performing the termination — Pregnancy termination may be provided in a physician’s office or in a hospital or clinic. In any of these settings, counseling should be provided before and after the termination, with the following goals:

●Assist in decision-making regarding termination.
●Provide information regarding the procedure, including different types of procedures, if appropriate, details of the procedure (including risk of complications or post-termination health risks), and follow-up care. Written information is useful for the patient to be able to refer to later. (See "Overview of pregnancy termination", section on 'Complications'.)
●Review payment options
●Provide emotional support and help the patient identify sources of social support. Identify patients with psychological symptoms or conditions who require additional psychological evaluation or care; abortion providers should have a list of resources for referrals as needed (eg, for adoption agencies or psychotherapists).
●Provide information about post-termination contraception (see "Postpartum and postabortion contraception")
The sections that follow focus on the psychological aspects of pregnancy termination counseling. Medical and other issues are discussed separately. (See "Overview of pregnancy termination", section on 'Preoperative considerations' and "Overview of pregnancy termination", section on 'Follow up'.)

Decision-making — It is important for clinicians and counselors to acknowledge the individual situation of the patient and to offer support in decision-making. Many private and public family planning and abortion services offer decision-making counseling and employ staff specifically trained to help the woman with this process. Several studies have found that the process of decision-making is a key factor in post-abortion reactions [60-62].

Unintended pregnancies are not necessarily unwanted, but financial problems, age and maturity, and lack of a supportive partner or parents may contribute to the decision to terminate. For women who feel compelled by their circumstances to have an abortion, reactions may range from welcoming the opportunity to end the pregnancy safely to feelings of profound ambivalence and outright disapproval. The latter is particularly true for women who have an anti-abortion perspective or believe that abortion is akin to murder. The clinician or counselor can help in identifying the key issues and considerations to facilitate a decision which will prevent negative psychological responses in the future. For women who feel ambivalent about an abortion decision, feelings of sadness and grieving are appropriate responses and women benefit from the opportunity to express a range of feelings about the pregnancy and potential parenthood [60]. Women with a great degree of emotional conflict may benefit from referral to a psychotherapist.

Women should ideally make the decision of carrying a pregnancy to term or terminating it without coercion and with the support of their partners, families, and health care providers. For adolescent patients, particular attention should be paid to the possibility of pressure to terminate or continue her pregnancy by her partner or parent. Clinicians or counselors should ask women considering pregnancy termination whether they feel pressured into making a particular choice, and should provide unbiased counseling to help a woman arrive at her own decision.

Control of decision-making may be an aspect of intimate partner violence. Some data suggest that women who experience intimate partner violence are more likely to have repeat terminations [63,64]. This may be due to being prevented from using contraception by a partner. In one study of women undergoing medication abortion, intimate partner violence was more common in women who were white, were unmarried, had previous spontaneous or induced abortions, and incorrectly estimated their gestational age. Screening and counseling for intimate partner violence should be provided, if appropriate. (See "Intimate partner violence: Diagnosis and screening".)

Emotional support — Studies suggest that counseling support before and after the abortion can have a positive effect on mental state and perception of the pregnancy termination experience [56].

Clinicians and counselors can discuss concerns and feelings that a woman has about pregnancy termination, including issues such as relationship health or attitudes toward abortion that may impact a woman’s emotional response. The discussion may also identify sources of emotional support outside of the clinician or counselor, such as social support, therapy, and abortion talk lines. Post-abortion support talk lines can provide ongoing emotional support subsequent to an abortion, particularly benefiting women who experience distress that does not manifest while in the clinic [65].

The clinician or counselor can help the woman to identify potential coping mechanisms, particularly if the woman is experiencing or anticipates emotional distress. One study (n = 5109) found that most women anticipated positive emotions following pregnancy termination, but those who anticipated poor coping were women with a history of depression, who were uncertain about or felt pushed into making the decision, had spiritual concerns about abortion, and adolescents anticipated poor coping [66]. Another study (n = 114) found that the presence of a support person in the abortion recovery space resulted in a significant decrease in pre- to postoperative anxiety levels [67].

Identifying women at risk of adverse outcomes — A number of validated inventories are available to help determine the woman's state of anxiety and depression pre- and post-abortion. The Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI), as an example, is a 10-minute test which includes symptom scales measuring Somatization, Obsessive Compulsive tendencies, Interpersonal Sensitivity, Depression, Anxiety, Hostility, Phobic Anxiety, Paranoid Ideation and Psychoticism [68]. Other non-validated evaluation questions include the Harris Tools [10], which are based on the clinical experiences of several authors with experience in abortion counseling. (See "Acute procedure anxiety in adults: Course, screening, assessment, and differential diagnosis", section on 'Screening' and "Screening for depression", section on 'Screening instruments'.)

In the rare circumstances when a woman might be at risk of suicide or self-harm, she should be referred to a qualified mental health professional or crisis services. In other situations where distress is expressed by the patient, referrals to further in-clinic counseling, community support organizations or abortion talk lines may be an appropriate addition to mental health referrals.

Counseling after termination — Counseling after pregnancy termination presents another opportunity to identify women at risk for significant emotional distress. As noted above, assessment for current symptoms or a prior history of mental health disorders are key components of this evaluation.

The expression of feelings of sadness and grief should be acknowledged, if present, and are beneficial to the woman's ability to cope following pregnancy termination. Women who need further post-pregnancy termination emotional support should be referred to therapists or organizations that offer support services, as women rarely return to the abortion provider for postabortion support.

TERMINATION FOR FETAL ANOMALIES OR MULTIPLE GESTATIONS

Termination for fetal anomalies — Advances in techniques for prenatal testing have resulted in the ability to diagnose many fetal abnormalities during pregnancy. Women and their partners who receive a diagnosis of a fetal abnormality must make a challenging decision regarding pregnancy termination or care or continuing the pregnancy. In addition, women with a multiple gestation may undergo selective termination if one fetus has an abnormality. (See "Multifetal pregnancy reduction and selective termination", section on 'Selective termination'.)

Counseling women who consider termination after confirmation of fetal anomalies demands special considerations; the pregnancy termination typically occurs at a time in the gestation when there is greater investment in the pregnancy. In addition, the pregnancy was likely to have been intended. Both factors can make the decision more painful. Guiding these women about grieving and providing a referral to a psychotherapist or support organization within the community can be particularly helpful.

Studies have found that women who terminate a pregnancy because of a fetal abnormality are likely to experience significant emotional distress. This level of distress is similar to women who have pregnancy loss during the second trimester or later [52]. In one study (n = 147), at four months after termination for a fetal anomaly, many women had symptoms of posttraumatic stress or depression (46 and 28 percent, respectively). The proportion of women with these symptoms was somewhat decreased at 16-month follow-up (21 and 13 percent) [69].

Prenatal diagnosis testing is available for some conditions during first trimester, but most fetal abnormalities are diagnosed in second trimester. One study found that women who underwent pregnancy termination for a fetal anomaly in the second trimester were more likely to have posttraumatic stress symptoms than those who had a first trimester termination [3].

Multifetal pregnancy reduction — Women with a multiple gestation may choose to terminate one or more of the fetuses to avoid complications of high order multiple gestation. The psychological outcomes of this procedure are discussed separately. (See "Multifetal pregnancy reduction and selective termination", section on 'Psychological outcome'.)

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

●The circumstance of an unwanted pregnancy or the discovery of a fetal anomaly involves many factors that are likely to be associated with emotional distress. The responses of women to these situations vary by individual emotional resilience, as well as age, social, cultural, religious, and legal context. (See 'Introduction' above.)
●The immediate and long-term psychological impacts of pregnancy termination are politically controversial, but scientific evidence does not support adverse impact. Systematic reviews by professional societies, the American Psychological Association (APA) and the United Kingdom National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health (NCCMH), found no increase in the risk of mental health disorders associated with pregnancy termination. (See 'Evidence regarding potential outcomes' above.)
●The degree of emotional distress in response to pregnancy termination may depend upon one or more of the following factors: prior mental health status, social support, attitude toward pregnancy termination (including religious beliefs), and adolescent age. (See 'Modifying factors' above.)
●The technique for pregnancy termination (ie, surgery or medication) does not appear to impact psychological outcomes. (See 'Other factors' above.)
●Primary care clinicians and obstetrician/gynecologists should be properly informed about the methods of pregnancy termination, their risks and benefits, and, if not offering pregnancy termination services, should be able to make appropriate referrals. (See 'Referring clinician' above.)
●Pregnancy termination counseling should include assessment of current symptoms or prior diagnoses of mental health disorders. Administration of a psychometric test may be useful. If indicated, psychological or psychiatric consultation should be recommended pre- or post-abortion. (See 'Identifying women at risk of adverse outcomes' above.)