Information and educational resources for occupational and environmental health issues in the United States
INTRODUCTION — A number of resources are available for clinicians and patients who need additional information about occupational and environmental health issues. Resources related to organizations in the United States are outlined here. An overview of occupational and environmental health is discussed separately. (See "Overview of occupational and environmental health".)

KEY TOPICS

Emergency preparedness and response — In addition to on-line information, a number of these sites have information that can be downloaded to a handheld device.

●CDC: Emergency Preparedness and Response (http://emergency.cdc.gov/)
●National Institute of Occupational and Environmental Health (NIOSH): Occupational Safety and Health topics - Emergency Preparedness and Response (http://www.cdc.gov.ezproxy.med.nyu.edu/niosh/topics/emergency.html). Includes tip sheets for numerous types of hazards, including chemical, natural, radiation, etc.
●American College of Physicians: Online bioterrorism resources (www.acponline.org/bioterro/)
●ACP Guide for Chemical Terrorism Identification (www.acponline.org/bioterro/chem_terr.pdf)
●United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission: What to do for a radiological emergency (www.nrc.gov/about-nrc/emerg-preparedness.html)
●Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): Plan Ahead (www.fema.gov/plan/index.shtm)
Pandemics

●Influenza Pandemic (www.pandemicflu.gov/index.html)
●American College of Physicians: Adult Immunization information (www.acponline.org/clinical_information/resources/adult_immunization)
●World Health Organization: Pandemic Preparedness (www.who.int/influenza/preparedness/pandemic/en/)
Dampness, mold and health effects

●CDC: mold and health, and guidelines about clean-up. Links to other sites. (www.cdc.gov/mold/)
●WHO: Damp and Mould: Health risks, prevention and remedial action (short brochure-good patient hand out, 2009). (http://www.euro.who.int.ezproxy.med.nyu.edu/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/78636/Damp_Mould_Brochure.pdf)
●WHO Regional Office of Europe, Protecting health from home damp and mould (http://www.euro.who.int.ezproxy.med.nyu.edu/__data/assets/pdf_file/0017/43325/E92645.pdf)
●Board on Health Promotion and Disease Prevention (HPDP), Institute of Medicine (IOM). Damp indoor spaces and health. The National Academies Press, 2004. Free executive summary also available on website. (www.nap.edu/openbook.php?isbn=0309091934)
●Storey E, Dangman KH, Schenck P, et al. Guidance for Clinicians on the Recognition and Management of Health Effects Related to Mold Exposure and Moisture Indoors. University of Connecticut Health Center Division of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 2004. (http://oehc.uchc.edu/clinser/MOLD%20GUIDE.pdf)
●EPA: "A Brief Guide to mold, moisture, and your home," 2010. (www.epa.gov/iaq/molds/moldguide.html)
●American College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine (ACOEM). Position Statement
Adverse Human Health Effects Associated with Molds in the Indoor Environment, February 2011. (http://www.acoem.org/AdverseHumanHealthEffects_Molds.aspx)
Finding information about chemicals

●EPA Integrated Risk Information System - The Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS) is an electronic database containing information on human health effects from various substances. This database provides concise information on individual chemicals (http://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/iris/index.cfm)
●Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/)
●Medical Management Guidelines (MMGs) for Acute Chemical Exposures (www.atsdr.cdc.gov/MMG/index.asp)
●Toxicological Profiles (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/index.asp)
●United States National Library of Medicine: Toxicology Data Network (Toxnet) (http://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov.ezproxy.med.nyu.edu)
●Chemical Information Specialized Information Services (http://sis.nlm.nih.gov.ezproxy.med.nyu.edu/chemical.html)
●ChemIDplus: Chemical dictionary database of compounds of biomedical and regulatory interest-with links to articles (http://chem.sis.nlm.nih.gov.ezproxy.med.nyu.edu/chemidplus/)
●The Collaborative on Health and the Environment Database: Summarizes links between chemical contaminants and approximately 180 human diseases or conditions. A collaboration among University of California at San Francisco, Natural Resources Defense Fund, and Science and Environmental Health Network (http://database.healthandenvironment.org/index.cfm)
●National Toxicology Program, US Department of Health and Human Services: 12th Report on Carcinogens (http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov.ezproxy.med.nyu.edu/?objectid=03C9AF75-E1BF-FF40-DBA9EC0928DF8B15)
●National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals (www.cdc.gov/exposurereport/) (last update 2012)
●UCSF Program on Reproductive Health and the Environment. “Toxic Matters.” (http://www.prhe.ucsf.edu/prhe/toxicmatters.html)
●CDC : Identification and Management of Lead Exposure in Pregnant women
(http://www.cdc.gov.ezproxy.med.nyu.edu/nceh/lead/publications/LeadandPregnancy2010.pdf)
●NIOSH Pocket Guide — The NPG is intended as a source of general industrial hygiene information on several hundred chemicals and classes for workers, employers, and occupational health professionals. The NPG does not contain an analysis of all pertinent data; rather, it presents key information and data in abbreviated or tabular form for chemicals or substance groupings (eg, cyanides, fluorides, manganese compounds) that are found in the work environment. (www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg)
●NIOSH Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances (www.cdc.gov/niosh/rtecs)
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AGENCIES

Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry — The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) is a division within the Public Health Service of the US Department of Health and Human Services. It is dedicated to preventing exposure and adverse human health effects associated with hazardous substances from waste sites, unplanned releases, and other sources of pollution in the environment. It publishes comprehensive Toxicological Profiles on a variety of agents. Each profile includes a short "Public Health Statement" in nontechnical language about that agent. The ATSDR website also provides fact sheets on critical hazards, including Tox FAQ (Toxicology Frequently Asked Questions) and case Studies in Environmental Medicine, which are useful for teaching.

www.atsdr.cdc.gov, for Tox FAQ: www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp, (888) 42-ATSCR, (888) 422-8737, email:

Centers for Disease Control — The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) provide information on birth defects, developmental disabilities, and environmental hazards and health effects.

www.cdc.gov

Travelers' Health Information

wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/

CDC's Yellow Book: Health Information for International Travel 2012 (http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/yellowbook-2012-home.htm)

National Center for Environmental Health — This site has chemical exposure information, advice for managing hazardous materials incidents, as well as a list of emergency preparedness links.

www.cdc.gov/nceh/default.htm, CDC-INFO, 800-CDC-INFO, 800-232-4636, TTY 888-232-6348, 24 Hours/Day, E-mail: cdcinfo@cdc.gov, CDC Emergency Response: 770-488-7100, for state and local health department assistance.

Air Pollution and Respiratory Health — Includes information and links to numerous other sites.

(www.cdc.gov/healthyplaces/healthtopics/airpollution.htm)

United States Consumer Product Safety Commission — This independent federal regulatory agency helps to reduce the risk of injury or death from consumer products. It can be contacted to inquire about or report unsafe products and has a special section for children's safety.

www.cpsc.gov, (800) 638-2772

United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) — In addition to the sites below, the EPA site has many links on their home page to sites with useful information.

www.epa.gov

Air Quality Tools for Schools Kit — Instructions for obtaining a free copy of the kit are available online.

www.epa.gov/iaq/schools/actionkit.html

EPA Integrated Risk Information System — (see above). The IRIS site also includes a useful glossary of terms.


http://ofmpub.epa.gov/sor_internet/registry/termreg/searchandretrieve/glossariesandkeywordlists/search.do?details=&glossaryName=IRIS%20Glossary

EPA Toxics Release Inventory Program — The Toxic Chemical Release Inventory (TRI) is an annual compilation on estimated releases into the environment of over 300 toxic chemicals. The data can be searched by zip code and other geographic values, by name of company, and by chemical substance.

www.epa.gov/tri, (800) 424-9346

EPA Safe Drinking Water Hotline — This hotline provides information to health professionals and the public, makes referrals, and distributes EPA publications.

http://water.epa.gov/, (800) 426-4791

EPA Office of Children's Health Protection — This office works with states to develop programs to address children's environmental health issues, and provides information and resources to individuals and communities who are interested in working to protect the health of children.

http://yosemite.epa.gov/ochp/ochpweb.nsf/content/homepage.htm

EPA Toxicity and Exposure Assessment for Children's Health (TEACH) — This searchable database contains overviews of scientific literature in the field of children's environmental health.

www.epa.gov/teach/

EPA Recognition and Management of Pesticide Poisonings — This revised handbook, available at no charge on line, covers 1500 pesticide products addressing toxicology, signs and symptoms of poisoning, and treatment. Useful book published in 1999; updates on CDC website.

www.epa.gov/pesticides/safety/healthcare/handbook/handbook.htm

Federal Citizen Information Center — This agency provides

useful information about product safety and a current list of product recalls.

www.pueblo.gsa.gov, (888) 878-3256

Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) — FEMA, part of the US Department of Homeland Security, has a primary mission to reduce the loss of life and property and protect people in the United States from all hazards, including natural disasters, acts of terrorism, and other man-made disasters, by leading and supporting a risk- based, comprehensive emergency management system of preparedness, protection, response, recovery, and mitigation.

www.fema.gov/index.shtm, FEMA-Correspondence-Unit@dhs.gov, 1 (800) 621-FEMA (3362)

Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA) — The FMCSA was established as a separate administration within the US Department of Transportation on January 1, 2000, pursuant to the Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act of 1999. The FMCSA's primary mission is to reduce crashes, injuries, and fatalities involving large trucks and buses. Physicians interface with FMCSA when performing Department of Transportation (DOT) exams.

http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/registration-licensing/registration-licensing.htm

United States Department of Housing and Urban Development — This is the regulatory agency for detecting and eliminating lead-based paint in housing.

www.hud.gov, (800) HUD-S-FHA, (800) 483-7342

Household Products Database — The household products database of the National Library of Medicine is based on the Consumer Product Information Database © 2001 by DeLima Associates. This database links over 4000 consumer brands to health effects from Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) provided by the manufacturers, and it allows scientists and consumers to research products based on chemical ingredients.

http://householdproducts.nlm.nih.gov.ezproxy.med.nyu.edu

Indoor Air Quality Information Clearinghouse (EPA) — This department answers inquiries about indoor air quality and the health effects of indoor air pollution.

www.epa.gov/iaq/index.html (800) 438-4318

National Radon Hotline — The National Safety Council's hotline provides information about radon and test kits.

www.epa.gov/radon/hotlines.html; (800) SOS-RADON, (800) 767-7236

Occupational Safety and Health Administration — The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has a national office within the Department of Labor, as well as regional offices all over the country. OSHA is responsible for creating and enforcing workplace safety and health regulations. OSHA offers publications about their regulations, occupational diseases, and fact sheets. Worksite inspections can be triggered by the complaint of a current worker.

www.osha.gov, for emergencies, dial the national office: (800) 321-OSHA, (800) 321-6742

National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health — The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) is part of the CDC and is responsible for conducting research and making recommendations for the prevention of work-related illnesses and injuries. NIOSH can provide information about substance toxicity by telephone inquiry and also has "criteria documents" summarizing research and information on various workplace hazards. NIOSH performs Health Hazard Evaluations of workplaces. The site also provides an online pocket guide to chemical hazards (intended to be usable on a Pocket PC), and information on respirators, musculoskeletal disorders, and issues related to health care workers.

www.cdc.gov/niosh/

NIOSH Technical Inquiries

1-800-CDC-INFO (1-800-232-4636)

NIOSH International Chemical Safety Card project — The NIOSH International Chemical Safety Card Project (ICSC) summarizes essential health and safety information on chemicals in non-technical language for their use at the "shop floor" level by workers and employers.

www.cdc.gov/niosh/ipcs/icstart.html

NIOSH Respirators — Information and links to sites providing information about the proper selection of respirators, respirator types, and care of respirators.

www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/respirators/ 

National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences — The National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), a component within the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Department of Health and Human Services, is engaged in multidisciplinary biomedical research programs in environmental health, prevention, and intervention efforts. It offers some environmental Fact Sheets and pamphlets on selected topics such as pesticides, endocrine disruptors, and electromagnetic fields (EMF). It also allows free access to its journal, Environmental Health Perspectives, which published high quality research articles, reviews, and case reports on a variety of environmental health and medicine issues.

www.niehs.nih.gov, (919) 541-3345

Environmental Health Perspectives, www.ehponline.org

National Library of Medicine — The National Library of Medicine and the NIH have compiled a database of household products that is very well organized and easy to use, enabling one to browse and search products, ingredients, and Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) to get information about health effects. It also offers information by trade name.

http://householdproducts.nlm.nih.gov.ezproxy.med.nyu.edu

National Pesticide Information Center — This Center is a cooperative effort between Oregon State University and the United States EPA, and it provides chemical, health, and environmental information on more than 600 pesticide active ingredients used in over 50,000 products.

http://npic.orst.edu, 1-800-858-7378

(7:30 AM to 3:30 PM PST), or email npic@ace.orst.edu

Pesticide Action Network Pesticides Database - current toxicity and regulatory information for pesticides

www.pesticideinfo.org

UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES WEBSITES

Armed Services

Post-Deployment Health: Deployment Health Clinical Center — Website to assist health care providers in the delivery of employment and post-deployment healthcare (www.pdhealth.mil/)

Force Health Protection & Readiness — Provides health and safety and other information developed by the military for the military personal, and for clinicians taking care of armed forces (http://fhp.osd.mil/)

Army Wounded Soldier and Family Hotline — (800) 984-8523, 7 am - 7 pm EST Monday through Friday

http://www.armymedicine.army.mil/wsfh/index.html

NONGOVERNMENTAL SOURCES AND PROFESSIONAL SOCIETIES

American Board of Preventive Medicine — Board certification in Occupational and Environmental Medicine is through the American Board of Preventive Medicine. This site provides information about training and certification requirements, as well as residency training programs.

www.theabpm.org

American College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine — The American College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine (ACOEM) is the world's largest organization of occupational and environmental physicians. It sponsors education conferences; publishes the Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, a newsletter, position papers and guidelines; maintains a directory of physicians who are board-certified in occupational-environmental medicine and members of the college located in regions throughout the United States; and provides lists of useful references -- all of this information is found on the website.

www.acoem.org

American Academy of Pediatrics

www.aap.org

AAP Children's Health Topics: Environmental health — This website offers information on a number of topics relevant to pediatric environmental health and also provides AAP policy statements on key topics such as lead exposure, air pollution, indoor molds, and mercury. There is also access to and ordering information for the AAP Handbook of Pediatric Environmental Health:

www2.aap.org/visit/cmte16.htm

Association of Occupational and Environmental Clinics — The Association of Occupational and Environmental Clinics (AOEC) is a network of nonprofit, academically-affiliated clinics and occupational medicine physicians throughout the United States. Practitioners can contact the AOEC clinics and refer patients for assistance in diagnosis, management, and prevention of occupational or environmentally-related illnesses. The website contains information and listings of the AOEC clinics, Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Units, and educational materials in OEM.

www.aoec.org, (888) 347-2632

American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists — Originally founded as an organization of government-related industrial hygienists, the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) membership comprises all practitioners of industrial health, occupational health, environmental health, and safety. ACGIH is well known for its paperback book, Documentation of Threshold Limit Values, which includes more than 700 chemical substances, 15 agents, and 36 Biologic Exposure Limits. ACGIH also has a publications clearinghouse and a directory of their membership of occupational health specialists.

www.acgih.org, (513) 742-2020

American Association of Occupational Health Nurses — This is the professional organization for occupational health nurses, and the internet site contains information about conferences, training and other educational materials.

www.aaohn.org

American Cancer Society — This association offers information on cancer prevention, detection, diagnosis and treatment. State and local branches sponsor stop smoking programs.

www.cancer.org, (800) ACS-2345

American Lung Association — This association provides stop smoking programs and information on radon and asbestos.

www.lungusa.org, 1-800-LUNGUSA

Greater Boston Physicians for Social Responsibility — A resource and action site for children's health environmental health issues. The site offers educational materials, including "In Harm’s Way," a resource about environmental toxins and infant and child development, can be downloaded from the website:

http://www.psr.org/chapters/boston/health-and-environment/

Children's Environmental Health Network — This Network concentrates on education, research, and policy in children's environmental health issues. The Network developed and produced the book, Resource Guide on Children's Environmental Health, with funding from private and governmental sources in 1997. The book includes listings with descriptions of government and private organizations, data sources, and a useful search index.

www.cehn.org, (202) 543-4033

Environmental health journals — Available free online.

Environmental Health Perspectives: Journal of peer-reviewed research and news on the impact of the environment on human health, published by the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. (http://ehponline.org)

Environmental Health: An open access journal with experienced academically affiliated editors in which you also see article reviews and commentary. (www.ehjournal.net)

Environmental Health News: This resource provides an excellent source of aggregated daily up-to-date information focusing on news, new science, new reports, and "hot topics" in environmental health. You may opt to receive a daily email, "Above the Fold", that will keep you informed on media coverage of environmental health concerns, issues, policy, and events. (www.environmentalhealthnews.org/)

Transportation Medicine — Resources for health care professionals involved in the medical evaluation of workers in the transportation industries. Presented By OccuMedix, Inc, and Natalie P. Hartenbaum, MD, MPH, FACOEM, Chief Medical Officer. This site contains a wealth of information concerning doing examinations related to transportation and interpreting medical regulations.

http://www.occumedix.com

TEACHING MATERIALS IN OCCUPATIONAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH

Association of Occupational and Environmental Clinics — Described earlier, AOEC also maintains a lending library of teaching slide shows on occupational and environmental health topics, and it also has some modules available on the website.

www.aoec.org/resources.htm

Center for Health and the Global Environment — The mission of the Center for Health and the Global Environment (CHGE) at Harvard School of Public Health is to educate students, faculty, physicians, other health professions, scientists, environmentalists, policy makers, media, and the general public about the potential human health consequences of global environmental change. The website contains educational resources on such topics as climate change, biodiversity, and human health.

http://chge.med.harvard.edu.ezproxy.med.nyu.edu, (617) 384-8530.