Screening for depression
INTRODUCTION — Depression is the most common psychiatric disorder in the general population [1] and the most common mental health condition in patients seen in primary care [2-5]. Although symptoms of depression are prevalent among primary care patients, few patients discuss these symptoms directly with their primary care clinicians. Instead, two-thirds of primary care patients with depression present with somatic symptoms (eg, headache, back problems, or chronic pain), making detection of depression more difficult [6,7].
In the absence of screening, it is estimated that only 50 percent of patients with major depression are identified [8]. Unless directly asked about their mood, patients omit information about depressive symptoms for a variety of reasons, including fear of stigmatization, belief that depression falls outside the purview of primary care, belief that depression isn’t a “real” illness but rather a personal flaw, concerns about medical record confidentiality, and concerns about being prescribed antidepressant medication or being referred to a psychiatrist [9].
Untreated depression is associated with decreased quality of life [10], increased risk of suicide [11], and poor physiological outcomes when depression co-occurs with chronic medical conditions [12]. Compared to non-depressed persons, patients with depression have an increased risk of mortality (relative risk 1.81) [13]. Each year lived with depression has been calculated to detract approximately 20 to 40 percent from a quality adjusted life year [14-16]. Furthermore, depression entails a significant economic burden, accounting for billions of dollars in the United States alone each year [17]. The effects of depression extend beyond the individual patient, with negative impact on patients’ employers [18], spouses [19,20], and children [21,22]. (See "Unipolar depression in adults: Assessment and diagnosis".)
For these reasons, systematic screening carries the potential for substantial benefit. This topic will review the evidence of the effectiveness of screening and recommendations for screening for depression in primary care. Management of patients with depression is discussed in detail separately. (See "Unipolar major depression in adults: Choosing initial treatment" and "Unipolar depression in adults: Treatment of resistant depression" and "Unipolar depression in adults: Management of highly resistant (refractory) depression".)
DEFINITIONS — Depressive syndromes are defined in DSM-5 [23]. The term “major depression” in this topic refers to unipolar depression.  
A major depressive syndrome or episode manifests with five or more of the following symptoms, present most of the day nearly every day for a minimum of two consecutive weeks. At least one symptom is either depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure.
●Depressed mood
●Loss of interest or pleasure in most or all activities
●Insomnia or hypersomnia
●Change in appetite or weight
●Psychomotor retardation or agitation
●Low energy
●Poor concentration
●Thoughts of worthlessness or guilt
●Recurrent thoughts about death or suicide
In addition, the symptoms cause substantial distress or impair psychosocial functioning, and are not the direct result of the physiology effect of a substance or general medical disorder.
Persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), a related condition, is characterized by depressive symptoms that last for at least two years, with depressed mood present for most of the day, and for more days than not. The depressed mood is accompanied by two or more of the following symptoms:
●Decreased or increased appetite
●Insomnia or hypersomnia
●Low energy
●Poor self-esteem
●Poor concentration
●Hopelessness
(See "Unipolar depression in adults: Assessment and diagnosis".)
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND RISK FACTORS — Depression is highly prevalent throughout the world and the prevalence appears to be increasing. Community surveys of adults living in 10 countries (Brazil, Canada, Chile, Czech Republic, Germany, Japan, Mexico, Netherlands, Turkey, and the United States) found that the lifetime prevalence of major depression varied from 3 percent in Japan to 17 percent in the United States, with most rates in the range of 8 to 12 percent [24]. Reasons for the lower prevalence of depression in some countries may reflect true variation in the determinants of depression due to cultural or genetic factors, sample selection biases, and problems with the cross-cultural portability of diagnostic criteria [25,26]. Depression is more difficult to detect in cultures where patients are more likely to present with somatic symptoms, rather than emotional symptoms [27]. (See "Unipolar depression in adults: Epidemiology, pathogenesis, and neurobiology", section on 'Epidemiology'.)
In the United States, the National Comorbidity Survey Replication found an annual prevalence rate for major depressive disorder (MDD) of 6.7 percent [28] and a lifetime prevalence rate of 16.5 percent [29]. Among patients with chronic medical illness, the annual prevalence rate is significantly higher, approximately 25 percent [30]. Rates of depression may be particularly high in diseases of the central nervous system (eg, stroke, traumatic brain injury, Parkinson disease) [31-33], cardiovascular disorders [34,35], cancer [36], and conditions involving immune and inflammatory mechanisms (eg, systemic lupus erythematosus [37]).
Risk factors for depression involve genetic, medical, environmental, and social influences, and include:
●Prior depressive episode
●Family history
●Female gender
●Childbirth (ie, post-partum depression)
●Childhood trauma
●Stressful life events
●Poor social support
●Serious medical illness
●Dementia
●Substance abuse
(See "Unipolar depression in adults: Epidemiology, pathogenesis, and neurobiology", section on 'Pathogenesis'.)
Although knowledge of risk factors can be clinically helpful, it is not sufficient to guide clinical practice or the decision to screen for depression.
PRESENTATION, NATURAL HISTORY, AND COURSE OF ILLNESS — Patients with depressive syndromes may present with mood, cognitive, neurovegetative, or somatic symptoms. Mood manifestations include sadness, emotional distress, emotional numbness, or sometimes anxiety or irritability. Neurovegetative symptoms include loss of energy, changes in sleep, appetite, or weight. Certain patient populations are more likely to present with somatic symptoms (headache, abdominal or pelvic pain, back pain, or other physical complaints), which can impede the diagnosis of depression. Populations in which somatic symptoms often predominate include pregnant women, older adults, incarcerated individuals, some cultural ethnicities, patients with low incomes, and patients with co-existing medical conditions [6].
Most individuals with depressive syndromes eventually remit, such that approximately half will be in remission after one year [38] and three-quarters after two years [39]. However, subsyndromal symptoms of depression often persist even after full criteria for depression are no longer met. The most common symptom to persist after remission is insomnia, followed by sad mood, and decreased concentration [40]. Persistence of such symptoms heightens the risk for recurrence of the full depressive syndrome. (See"Unipolar depression in adults: Course of illness".)
Individuals who have suffered from one episode of depression frequently have recurrences; among patients with a history of depression, 72 percent report having more than one episode [41]. The average age of onset for unipolar major depression among patients seen in clinical settings is in the thirties, with earlier age of onset associated with a range of negative biopsychosocial outcomes [42].
Effective treatments for depression include pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy. Chronic depression is associated with poorer treatment response [43], underscoring the importance of early identification and treatment. (See "Unipolar major depression in adults: Choosing initial treatment" and "Unipolar depression in adults: Treatment of resistant depression".)
RATIONALE FOR SCREENING — Several factors related to depression would seem to lead to a cogent argument for population screening:
●Depression is often difficult to detect since patients often present with a variety of somatic symptoms and may be reluctant to acknowledge symptoms of depression.
●Untreated depression is associated with decreased quality of life, increased mortality, and increased economic burden.
●Depression can be successfully treated and treatment is more effective when started early in the course.  
However, the true test of whether or not screening is effective is a trial in which patients are randomly assigned to a screening group or to a non-screened control group, and the two groups compared over time for outcomes related to the condition being screened. Only two relatively short-term randomized trials have evaluated screening alone without additional supports for the treatment of depression [44,45]. These studies found conflicting results. Thus, there is disagreement among experts on how best to interpret the available evidence.
EFFECTIVENESS OF SCREENING — The effectiveness of screening depends upon multiple factors:
●Whether a condition is sufficiently common in the general population to merit screening
●Whether there is an asymptomatic or early phase of the condition that can be detected by screening and for which treatment is more effective than if started at a later and more symptomatic time
●Whether there is a screening test with acceptable performance characteristics (high sensitivity and relatively high specificity)
●Whether the screening test is easily administered, inexpensive, and well tolerated by the patient
●Whether outcomes of screening result in clinically meaningful benefits that outweigh potential harms to the patient
In considering screening for depression in primary care, there is good evidence that depression is both a common condition and frequently undetected in the absence of screening. There is evidence that response rates to treatment are better if treatment is initiated earlier in the course of depression. Screening instruments are available that are relatively easy to administer and have been validated for use in primary care. Less well confirmed, however, is whether screening leads to improved patient outcomes that outweigh the potential harms of false-positive test results and unnecessary treatment.
Several high-quality systematic reviews address the effects of depression screening in primary care settings for a broad range of clinically-relevant outcomes [46-48]. A review completed for the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) found that screening in adults, without other practice enhancements to improve depression care, increases the rate of depression diagnosis (absolute increase 10 to 47 percent) [46]. A subsequent meta-analysis of 16 studies with 7576 patients found the use of depression screening or case-finding instruments in primary care or other non-mental health settings was associated with a modest increase in clinicians’ recognition of depression (relative risk [RR] 1.27, 95% CI 1.02-1.59) and a nonsignificant impact on the initiation of any treatment (RR 1.30; CI 0.97-1.76) with no influence on the prescription of antidepressants (RR 1.20, CI 0.87-1.66) [47]. The seven studies that provided data on clinical outcomes, however, found no evidence of an effect on depressive symptoms [49]. This suggests that although screening is important for detecting depression, it is insufficient to improve clinical outcomes.  
Other systematic reviews, including an update for the USPSTF [48], included studies that evaluated screening in combination with additional staff support for activities such as symptom monitoring, self-management plans, or facilitated referral [50]. The USPSTF review identified eight randomized controlled trials and found that intervention patients were more likely to show significant improvement in depressive symptoms than control patients (relative risk 1.78), improvements that persisted for up to five years [48,51,52]. Although the independent contribution of screening in these complex interventions is impossible to determine, these data support the conclusion that depression screening, coupled with appropriate follow-up and effective treatment supported by staff in addition to the primary care clinician, is beneficial. Effective treatment requires careful monitoring of treatment adherence and clinical response together with changes in treatment if the clinical response is poor [53]. This is no different from the approach to patients with chronic medical conditions. For example, when a screening blood glucose test reveals diabetes and treatment is initiated, that patient will need subsequent glucose monitoring, titration of therapy, and involvement of a healthcare team to optimize clinical outcomes.
The USPSTF systematic review did not find any evidence that addressed the potential harms of screening [48]. Potential harms include false-positive diagnoses with subsequent labeling effects and unnecessary treatment, including the medication costs and adverse effects of medication, as well as opportunity costs (time taken from a patient encounter to screen for depression might be spent on other preventive or therapeutic activities). Depression screening is highly accepted, with few patients finding the process burdensome or upsetting [54-56].
Cost-effectiveness — Data on the cost-effectiveness of depression screening are limited and come from two sources, simulation approaches and randomized trials of enhanced care models that utilized depression screening to identify patients. Limited evidence suggests that depression screening may be cost-effective when conducted in general medical settings with a high prevalence of depression (eg, serving patients with chronic medical conditions) coupled with access to enhanced models of care.
The modeling approach used a sophisticated Markov model to estimate the costs of screening and found high costs for annual screening ($192,444 per quality adjusted life year [QALY]) but lower costs for screening every five years ($85,679/QALY) [57]. Screening was cost effective only under the optimistic conditions of high prevalence (≥13 percent) and high treatment and remission rates. Cost-effectiveness analyses were reported in two of the seven trials included in the most recent USPSTF review of depression screening. Costs per quality adjusted life year (QALY) were within the proposed threshold of ≤$50,000 per QALY for interventions considered to be cost-effective, ranging from $9478 to $36,467 per QALY [58,59].
An evidence synthesis evaluating the cost-effectiveness of depression screening for post-natal depression found no adequate primary data, and a simulation model did not suggest cost-effectiveness using conventional thresholds [60,61].
SCREENING OPTIONS
Targeted versus general population screening — One approach, recommended by the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), is to screen all patients during routine visits and then further evaluate those who score above a specified threshold [62]. A more selective approach, known as case-finding, is to evaluate only those patients whose clinical presentation triggers a suspicion of depression. Clinical red flags for depression include [63]:
●Insomnia
●Fatigue
●Chronic pain
●Recent life changes or stressors
●Fair or poor self-rated health
●Unexplained physical symptoms
Although the likelihood of a depressive disorder increases by 1.5 to 3.5 times if a patient reports any of these symptoms, this targeted approach is only moderately more efficient than routine screening and misses more patients who have a depressive disorder [64,65]. Compared to screening all adults, case-finding increases specificity but decreases sensitivity (eg, false-positive findings are decreased but fewer patients suffering from clinical depression are identified). Rates of false positives are lower for screening in specialty settings than in primary care because of the increased prevalence of depression in patients with chronic illness (eg, chronic heart disease, COPD, diabetes mellitus).  
Regardless of the approach, further evaluation following screening is essential to confirm a diagnosis of depression. Trials using either screening approaches are associated with improved clinical outcomes when coupled with careful diagnostic assessment and treatment. (See 'Effectiveness of screening' above.)
Screening instruments — A number of attributes should be considered in choosing a questionnaire to screen for depression, including its diagnostic accuracy in the population being screened and the feasibility of its administration. Factors impacting feasibility include the number of questions, scoring and ease of interpretation, and reading level required. These characteristics are summarized in a table for recommended questionnaires (table 1) [66,67].
The diagnostic accuracy of screening questions for depression is validated against structured diagnostic interviews that use consensus criteria, such as DSM-5. Systematic reviews evaluating the performance of screening questionnaires in primary care settings found that the sensitivity is too low (32 percent) if only a single question about depression is posed [68]. However, short questionnaires that range from 2 to 10 questions perform well (table 1) [66,68]. In a meta-analysis of screening instruments in primary care, the median sensitivity and specificity of instruments was 85 and 74 percent respectively, with no significant difference in performance between instruments [67].
Short screening instruments include the PHQ-9, the PHQ-2, the Beck Depression Inventory for Primary Care, and the WHO-5. These can be self-administered by patients preceding their meeting with a clinician, or while in the waiting area.
PHQ-9 — The PHQ-9 (table 2) is somewhat more accurate than other screens (sensitivity 88 percent; specificity 88 percent) and is useful for monitoring a patient’s response to treatment [69-72]. The PHQ-9 is scored 0 to 27, with scores ≥10 indicating a possible depressive disorder. It also includes a question to assess whether depressive symptoms are impairing function, a key criteria to establish a DSM-based diagnosis [23]. Similar to other screening questionnaires, the PHQ-9 is not sufficiently accurate to establish a definitive diagnosis for depression, with both sensitivity and specificity at 88 percent [73]. Scores exceeding the threshold for a positive screen should prompt a careful diagnostic assessment. The PHQ-9 can be used to monitor treatment response. (See "Unipolar depression in adults: Assessment and diagnosis" and "Using scales to monitor symptoms and treat depression (measurement based care)".)
Using a prevalence of 10 percent for major depressive disorder or dysthymia, a score of 10 or higher on the PHQ-9 yields a positive predictive value of 45 percent. Some false-positive screens may lead to other diagnoses that share symptoms with major depressive disorder (MDD), such as anxiety disorder, at-risk alcohol use, or subsyndromal depression, a condition defined by lower-level depressive symptoms that increases the risk for MDD. A score less than 10 on the PHQ-9 yields a negative predictive value of 99 percent.
PHQ-2 — The PHQ-2 is a briefer and somewhat less accurate option to the PHQ-9 (sensitivity 83 percent; specificity 90 percent) [69]. The PHQ-2 is comprised of the first two questions from the PHQ-9 (form 1):
●During the last month, have you often been bothered by feeling down, depressed, or hopeless?
●During the last month, have you often been bothered by having little interest or pleasure in doing things?
The PHQ-2 has the advantage of easy verbal administration and may be administered asking for responses as yes/no or scaled zero to three. A single “yes” response or a score ≥3 (total score range zero to six) indicate possible depression.
Beck Depression Inventory for Primary Care — The Beck Depression Inventory for Primary Care (BDI-PC) is a 7-item scale [74] adapted from the extensively validated 21-item Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II) [75,76]. The 21-item BDI-II is useful for monitoring treatment response. In primary care outpatients, the BDI-PC with a cut-off of four points had 97 percent sensitivity and 99 percent specificity for identifying major depression [77]. However, the BDI is available only by license requiring a fee, and thus has limited use for screening since other instruments are available in the public domain.
WHO-5 — The WHO-5 (form 2) is somewhat less sensitive than other instruments but highly specific [78].
Instruments for special populations — Specialized depression questionnaires are available for some patient populations. For example, the Edinburgh Postpartum Depression Scale (EPDS) (figure 1) and the PHQ-9 (table 2) have been validated in practices serving pregnant or postpartum women (table 1). In some studies of postpartum women, the EPDS was more sensitive than the PHQ-9 for detecting depressive disorders [79]. Postnatally, the EPDS has a sensitivity that ranges from 60 (specificity 97 percent) to 96 percent (specificity 45 percent) for major depression [60]. (See "Depression in pregnant women: Clinical features and consequences", section on 'Screening'.)
Clinicians caring for older adults should consider the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS). The GDS uses a simple yes/no response format and is available in 30-, 15-, and 5-item versions; the 15-item version (sensitivity 81 percent, specificity 78 percent) performs better than the 30-item version for identifying late-life depression in primary care [80]. Although many geriatricians favor the GDS, evidence suggests the PHQ-9 performs just as well or better in older patients, including those who are cognitively impaired or living in nursing homes [69]. As a result, the PHQ-9 has been incorporated into the MDS 3.0, which is part of the US federally-mandated process for clinical assessment of all residents in Medicare-certified nursing homes. (See "Diagnosis and management of late-life depression", section on 'Screening instruments'.)
Spanish versions of the PHQ-9, the Edinburgh Postpartum Depression Scale, and the Geriatric Depression Scale have been tested but are not as well-validated as the English language versions [81].
SCREENING IMPLEMENTATION — When personnel or systems are available to assure appropriate follow-up and management of patients who screen positive, screening all adults for depression at the time of a routine visit perhaps is the simplest approach, particularly when using an electronic medical record (EMR) that incorporates clinical reminders. Practices may wish to distribute questionnaires at check-in for patients to complete, or have staff distribute or verbally administer questionnaires along with assessment of vital signs. When using the latter approach, many practices find it most efficient to administer the PHQ-2 verbally and, when positive, distribute a longer questionnaire, such as the PHQ-9, to be completed in the examination room while the patient is waiting for the clinician.
Use of previsit videos or interactive computer programs to engage patients in recognition of depression symptoms has also been explored. In one randomized trial, patients with depressive symptoms who used a tailored interactive computer program in the waiting area prior to their physician visit were more likely to be treated for depression (by antidepressant prescription and/or referral) than control patients; viewing a tailored video did not increase treatment [82]. However, there was no difference between groups in mental health outcomes at 12 weeks.  
Regardless of the screening approach chosen, changing practice routines can be challenging [83]. To facilitate implementation of depression screening, everyone on staff should understand the following:
●Why depression screening is important
●How to address patients’ concerns about confidentiality
●How to introduce depression screening to patients
●The importance of asking the screening questions verbatim
Staff-assisted depression care refers to supporting clinical staff (case managers, care support and coordination staff, or social workers) who provide direct care or coordinate care for patients with depression. They provide additional support for symptom monitoring, self-management plans, and/or facilitated referral. Examples of staff-assisted depression care include [48,53,84]:
●A nurse who screens patients for depression, informs the physician of a positive screen, and facilitates referral to a mental health treatment center [84].
●Trained care managers who assess patient symptoms at baseline and follow-up, using a standardized instrument, and who assess treatment adherence.
●Collaborative care involving direct coordination between mental health specialists and primary care.
Care is also facilitated by inclusion of active self-management support and assuring active follow-up for a minimum of 16 weeks [53].
There is limited evidence to guide the optimal frequency of routine screening for depression. Although screening every five years may be more cost-effective than more frequent screening [57], annual screening or screening at the time of a health maintenance examination may be easier to incorporate into routine practice.
It bears mentioning that the greatest impact of depression derives from insufficient treatment of patients with known depression, rather than lack of screening to identify depression in less symptomatic patients [48]. Practices should prioritize high-quality treatment, including these practice supports over depression screening.
GUIDELINE RECOMMENDATIONS — Guidelines on depression from several countries vary in their recommendations. In the United States, the Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) and other groups recommend general population screening, when staff-assisted depression care support is available. Targeted population screening aimed at higher-risk groups is recommended in the United Kingdom. Canada recommends not screening, either for average- or high-risk groups.
Based on our interpretation of the available evidence, we support general population screening for depression when the practice setting can assure reliable follow-up to accurately confirm the diagnosis and initiate treatment and follow-up. We recommend against screening when resources are not available to appropriately follow-up a positive screening test and to initiate and monitor treatment for patients diagnosed with depression.
United States — The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends that routine depression screening for adults should only be conducted when staff-assisted depression care supports are in place to ensure appropriate diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up [62]. The USPSTF guidelines serve as the basis for practice recommendations from several other organizations in the United States, including the American Academy of Family Physicians [85] and the US Department of Veterans Affairs [86]. The Department of Veterans Affairs recommends screening on an annual basis.
Canada — The Canadian Task Force of Preventive Health Care had based a 2005 recommendation for screening [87] on the 2002 systematic review for the USPSTF [46], recommending screening adults in the general population in primary care settings that could provide integrated feedback to patients and access to case management or mental health treatment. However, the Canadian Task Force reversed their recommendation for screening in 2013 [88,89]. In the absence of high-quality evidence of the effectiveness of screening for depression, and with concern about false-positive diagnoses leading to unnecessary treatment, the Canadian Task Force recommends against routine screening for depression in the primary care setting. They advise that clinicians remain alert to signs of depression (insomnia, low mood, anhedonia, and suicidal thoughts), and advise a high priority be set to perform randomized controlled trials of depression screening with an unscreened control group.
United Kingdom — Guidelines from the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) suggest targeted screening for patients at increased risk of depression, including those with a history of depression, diabetes or coronary heart disease, disability due to physical illness, or dementia [90]. They specifically recommend to “be alert to possible depression” and to use the two questions from the PHQ-2 for individuals who may be depressed:
●During the last month, have you often been bothered by feeling down, depressed or hopeless?
●During the last month, have you often been bothered by having little interest or pleasure in doing things?
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
●Depression is the most common psychiatric disorder and the most common mental health condition among patients seen in primary care. In the absence of screening, it is estimated that only 50 percent of patients with major depressive disorder are identified. (See 'Introduction' above.)
●Patients with depression may present with mood, cognitive, neurovegetative, or somatic symptoms. Diagnosis of depression is more challenging in patients who present with somatic symptoms. Effective treatments for depression include pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy. Chronic depression is associated with poorer treatment response. (See 'Presentation, natural history, and course of illness' above and "Unipolar major depression in adults: Choosing initial treatment" and "Unipolar depression in adults: Treatment of resistant depression".)
●Depression screening improves diagnosis rates, but clinical outcomes are only improved if screening is part of an enhanced care approach in which staff are available to participate in patient management. There appear to be limited, if any, harms from screening. (See 'Effectiveness of screening' above.)
●For practices choosing to screen, the two-item PHQ, either as a verbal or written screen, is easily administered with reasonable performance characteristics (form 1). A positive screen should be followed by a clinical interview, facilitated with the PHQ-9 (table 2) or a similar instrument, to diagnose depression. (See 'Screening instruments' above.)
●Recommendations for screening for depression vary internationally. Consistent with guidelines from the US Preventive Services Task Force, we suggest screening adults for depression when staff-assisted depression care supports are in place to ensure appropriate diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up (Grade 2B). The optimal frequency of screening is not established by evidence. To facilitate ease of implementation, we support screening at the time of a routine health visit. (See 'Guideline recommendations' above.)

