Children with special health care needs
INTRODUCTION — The mission of pediatric health care providers changed considerably during the 20th century. Effective therapies were developed for many life-threatening infectious diseases and congenital abnormalities. Preventive health care (eg, immunization and anticipatory guidance for injury prevention) became more important. Many children with conditions that once were universally fatal now survive into adolescence, early adulthood, and beyond. Pediatric health care providers must be prepared to provide care to an increasing number of these children with special health care needs (CSHCN).
The traditional approach to chronic conditions in children is a categorical one, based upon an organ system, diagnosis-specific view of the condition, and an emphasis on pathophysiology and biomedical treatment. A noncategorical approach emphasizes the psychological, developmental, educational, and social aspects of the condition [1-4] and facilitates the development of programs to better assist CSHCN and their families.
DEFINITIONS — The World Health Organization (WHO) defines impairment as an abnormality in body structure or appearance or in the function of an organ or system. A disability is an impairment that restricts activity. A handicap is a disability that causes an individual to be limited by society.
A chronic disorder is a serious health condition lasting at least one year that produces or is virtually certain to produce one or more of the following [1]:
●Disability or limitation of function or activity
●Disfigurement
●Dependency on medications or special diet for normal function
●Dependency on medical technology
●Need for medical care or services beyond what usually is required for children of the same age
●Need for ongoing treatment at home
In 1995, the Department of Health and Human Services Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB) defined children with special health care needs (CSHCN) as those who have or are at increased risk of developing a chronic physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional condition and who also require health and related services of a type or amount beyond that usually required by children [5].
The range of conditions requiring special needs is broad and includes, but is not limited to, problems such as cystic fibrosis, asthma, diabetes, food allergy, sickle cell disease, juvenile idiopathic arthritis (formerly juvenile rheumatoid arthritis), genetic disorders, spina bifida, neuromuscular disease, epilepsy, congenital heart disease, trauma-related injury, and human immunodeficiency syndrome, as well as disorders of speech, language, learning, and behavior. (See appropriate topic reviews).
EPIDEMIOLOGY — The incidence and prevalence of disability among children is difficult to determine. Data from the 2009-2010 National Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs indicate that 15 percent of children <18 years of age in the United States (more than 11 million children) have special health care needs and 23 percent of households with children have at least one child with special health care needs (eg, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, intellectual disability, cerebral palsy, autism spectrum disorder, epilepsy, arthritis/joint problems, allergies, etc) (figure 1) [6].
The prevalence of chronic illness among American children continues to increase with the decreased mortality from once-fatal diseases (eg, cystic fibrosis, acute lymphocytic leukemia), improved survival of premature infants (eg, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, hearing impairment, developmental delay), and the dramatic increase in childhood asthma. Respiratory diseases, speech and intelligence impairments, and mental/nervous system disorders are the most common activity-limiting conditions [7].
The prevalence of special health care needs is higher among older children, boys, African-Americans, children from single-parent homes, and children whose parents have lower educational attainment [6-11]. Compared with children with chronic conditions from more affluent families, children with chronic conditions from poor families are more likely to be without a usual source of health care or to be uninsured (21 versus 10 percent in 1988) [12]. Children with special health care needs (CSHCN) with more severe conditions are more likely to have unmet needs for primary care, as well as for specialty services, than those less severely affected [13].
SURVEY TOOLS — Several survey tools are used in studying these populations.
●The Questionnaire for Identifying Children with Chronic Conditions (QuICCC) utilizes Stein's noncategorical approach with this population [14]. A short version of this questionnaire (QuICCC-R) may be used to screen populations of children for chronic illness [15].
●The Children with Special Health Care Needs (CSHCN) Screener is a survey that uses parental responses to five questions regarding consequences experienced by children with ongoing health conditions to identify CSHCN [16]. In one comparison study, the CSHCN Screener and QuICCC-R had approximately 90 percent agreement when administered to two random samples of children [17].
●A module for children with special health care needs has been developed and tested as an addition to the widely used Consumer Assessment of Health Plans Survey(CAHPS). The CAHPS Supplemental Item Set for Children with Chronic Conditions can be used to identify CSHCN among a managed care organization's population and to test the quality of services received by these children.
●The National Association of Children's Hospitals and Related Institutions (NACHRI) developed the Classification of Congenital and Chronic Health Conditions (CCCHC) in 1997 using the more traditional biomedical approach [18].
●The American Academy of Pediatrics has been engaged in the Functional Outcomes Project since 1992 to develop disease-specific measures of quality outcome monitoring [19].
IMPLICATIONS OF CHRONIC CONDITIONS IN CHILDHOOD — Chronic health conditions have biologic, developmental, psychological, and social implications for children [1]. Approaching the care of a child with a chronic condition using the traditional organ system-based method of understanding disease will not address many of these aspects so important to the attainment of optimal health for our young patients.
Biologic — The biologic implications depend largely upon the state of the art in medical treatment for the condition. The state-of-the-art treatment may result in cure, improvement in long-term outcome, or palliation of symptoms.
Routine health care maintenance, including immunization, screening (particularly visual assessment and hearing), and anticipatory guidance (including nutrition and physical activity), is as important for children with special health care needs (CSHCN) as is treatment for the chronic condition [20-23]. In addition, children with chronic conditions often develop acute intercurrent illnesses that must be distinguished from acute manifestations of their chronic condition and treated appropriately. (See "Visual development and vision assessment in infants and children", section on 'Vision assessment in children with special needs'.)
Pediatric health care providers who care for CSHCN should be prepared to plan treatment strategies, monitor outcomes, coordinate visits and diagnostic tests with subspecialists, train caregivers, or educate other service providers in the community who may be involved with the child, particularly in emergency situations [24,25]. Forms are available from the American Academy of Pediatrics to assist in collecting and maintaining a comprehensive data source on each child. A comprehensive written care plan should be developed in conjunction with the family as key members of the health care team and, if the child is old enough, the patient, as well. This plan should include a comprehensive problem list, a list of contact information of all providers, a complete medication list, and a detailed plan for the child's care for the next year. The family should receive a copy of the plan each time it is updated, and updated copies should be sent to all providers involved in the care of the child.
Pediatric health care providers should also be aware that children with disabilities are at greater risk of child abuse (physical and sexual) and neglect than children without disabilities and that the child’s disabilities may be the result of child abuse or neglect [26-30]. As with all pediatric populations, health care providers should monitor for signs or symptoms of child abuse and refer the child for appropriate treatment if indicated. Acknowledging family strengths, addressing family stressors, offering support and assistance with parenting skills, and helping parents to obtain home health or respite care services may help in the prevention of maltreatment of these children [27]. (See"Physical abuse in children: Epidemiology and clinical manifestations" and "Support services for the care of chronically ill children".)
Development/learning — CSHCN may have altered physical and psychosocial development as a result of their chronic condition. Most of these children and their families have different developmental experiences and expectations than those of healthy children. Developmental difficulties are most likely to occur at periods of normal developmental transitions (eg, school entry or adolescence). Modifications necessitated by the condition that are acceptable to the child at one stage of development may actually hinder progression to the next stage. As an example, parental dedication of hours each day to permit home care for a technology-dependent eight-year-old child can create a dependency that inhibits the child's need for independence later in adolescence.
Few aspects of a child's life are as important as his or her formal education. The ability of children with chronic conditions to receive an appropriate education was severely limited until the passage of PL 94-142 in 1975 and PL 99-457 in 1986. These laws, now grouped under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), guarantee all children in the United States early intervention and school-age education that is suited to their individual needs and in the least restrictive environment. (See "Definitions of specific learning disability and laws pertaining to learning disabilities".)
More information regarding IDEA can be obtained from the following Web sites:
●www.ed.gov/offices/OSERS/IDEA/overview.html
●www.nichcy.org/laws/idea
This law mandates that CSHCN receive a multidisciplinary evaluation to determine their eligibility for special education services. The child's disability must interfere with the educational process or normal school performance to meet eligibility requirements [31]. Examples of qualifying conditions include, but are not limited to, intellectual disability (mental retardation), hearing deficiencies, visual impairments, speech and language impairments, specific learning disabilities, emotional disturbances, and orthopedic impairments. (See appropriate topic reviews).
The results of the multidisciplinary evaluation are used to formulate an individual family services plan (IFSP) for the preschool child or an individualized education program (IEP) for the older child. The IFSP or IEP should be designed to optimize the child's learning experience by addressing his or her particular developmental and educational needs. In addition to classroom teaching and/or tutoring, physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, and family services may be provided. The family should be involved in the development of the IFSP and IEP and must agree with the recommendations.
The pediatric health care provider is involved in the determination of eligibility by making the clinical diagnosis of a qualifying condition and helping to determine the child's functional ability and special needs. The pediatric health care provider also may make the referral to the early intervention or special education program and review the IFSP and IEP with the family [31]. In addition, he or she may help the family to obtain appropriate transportation and/or assistive technology devices as needed [24].
Increasing demands on the public school system may prevent CSHCN from receiving the evaluation and services to which they are entitled. Pediatric health care providers can advocate with the local school system to ensure that their patients receive the services that they require to maximize educational potential [32]. Personal acquaintance with the local school personnel greatly facilitates advocacy for CSHCN. However, when this is not possible, the word "IDEA" written on a prescription slip, signed by the pediatric health care provider, and handed to the school principal may help to speed up an IEP evaluation. (See "Support services for the care of chronically ill children", section on 'Education'.)
Transportation — The safe school bus transportation of CSHCN may require certain adaptations or personnel. Safe transportation of CSHCN is discussed separately. (See "Promoting safety in children with disabilities", section on 'Safe transportation'.)
Psychologic — Most CSHCN do not have serious psychologic problems; however, the rate of psychologic difficulties is greater among children with chronic conditions than among their healthy peers [33-35]. This increased rate persists into adulthood. Problems, if they are present, most often appear during adolescence. This is not surprising because the adolescent's need to achieve independence may be hindered if the child's condition requires assistance from parents, teachers, and health professionals. Pediatric health care providers who care for CSHCN should screen them for psychologic problems and refer them to mental health specialists if indicated.
Social — The social implications of chronic illness in childhood may be the most debilitating and difficult to overcome [36]. The chronic illness of a child has a great impact on the life of the family. The amount of time required for health care visits, therapies, and hospitalizations may result in social isolation from friends and extended family [37]. Parents may have difficulty finding time to devote to the healthy siblings of the chronically ill child. The home environment may be altered by home nursing, therapy, or special equipment, such as a wheelchair.
The pediatric health care provider may be able to facilitate connections with other families who have had similar experiences and are willing to provide parent-to-parent support. In addition, pediatric practitioners can inform the family about possible sources of respite care, if any are available. The National Respite Locator service can identify local respite care providers in the United States. The family should be aware that respite care programs may not be reimbursable.
FINANCIAL ISSUES — In addition to the biologic, developmental, educational, psychologic, and social implications, chronic conditions also affect the family's economic status. The family may need to pay out of pocket for medication and/or therapy that is not fully covered by insurance [38,39]. Indeed, families of children with special health care needs (CSHCN) have higher out-of-pocket expenses than others [40]. Survey data indicate that CSHCN with inadequate insurance coverage have poorer outcomes [41] and that enrollment in a state Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) improved medical care for CSHCN (decline in unmet needs for prescription medications and specialty care) [42].
Interviews with the families of 38,866 CSHCN identified through the 2001 National Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs indicated that although 95 percent of CSHCN had insurance, coverage was inadequate to meet health care needs in 32 percent [43]. Data from the 2000 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey indicate that families of CSHCN incurred greater out-of-pocket medical expenses per $1000 of family income than those of children without special health care needs ($6.20 versus $3.06) [39].
The potential for career advancement for one or both parents may be limited geographically by the need to maintain a therapeutic relationship with the child's health care providers. Having a child with poor health status (as measured by chronic condition or disability status, activity limitations, hospitalizations, and general reported health) is associated with reduced parental employment, although the causality of this relationship has not been determined [44].
When compared with normal children, children with limitations in their daily functioning (ie, disabilities) use more services than those without these impairments (table 1) [38,45-47]. Not surprisingly, then, the cost of health care is much higher for chronically ill children, with the highest cost incurred by the most severely affected children [18,47].
Medicaid and SSI — The costs of health care of children with special needs are paid in several ways. Medicaid or the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) covers some expenses if the family's income places them in an eligible category according to their state's criteria. Following enrollment into CHIP, CSHCN have been shown to demonstrate significant decrease in unmet medical needs and improvement in overall quality of care without a concomitant increase in expensive emergency department or hospitalization services [48].
Some CSHCN may be eligible for Supplemental Security Income (SSI). The SSI program, originally conceived to provide assistance to disabled workers, was later expanded to include children [49]. A monthly cash stipend and Medicaid coverage are awarded to eligible applicants.
Eligibility is determined by the state's Disability Determination Service Agency based upon written information provided by the pediatric health care provider (table 2), parents, and others. The Social Security Administration (SSA) considers a child to have a disability if [49]:
●The child has a physical or mental impairment that results in marked and severe functional limitations
●The condition has lasted, or is expected to last, at least a year or is expected to cause death within a year
Certain medical conditions are "presumptively eligible" for SSI benefits (table 3). Children with these conditions may receive SSI benefits for up to six months during the formal eligibility evaluation. The details of SSI eligibility determination are beyond the scope of this review. However, a copy of "Disability Evaluation Under Social Security" may be obtained from the SSA Office of Public Affairs, Public Information Distribution Center, PO Box 17743, Baltimore, MD 21235; Phone: 410-965-0945, Fax: 410-965-0696.
Parents can visit an SSA office or contact the SSA by phone (1-800-772-1213) to apply for SSI benefits for a disabled child [49].
Title V of the Social Security Act — Other governmental assistance is available to some CSHCN through Title V of the Social Security Act. This program, administered by the Department of Health and Human Services Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB) through state departments of health, varies dramatically from state to state but usually serves as the payer of last resort for otherwise uncovered health care services, especially care by pediatric specialists.
Commercial insurance — Coverage for CSHCN through commercial insurance poses special challenges and opportunities. Some traditional indemnity policies have not covered "preexisting conditions", a special problem for families who may change carriers when a parent changes jobs. However with the passage of the Affordable Care Act of 2010, denial of coverage for preexisting conditions is now illegal. On the other hand, commercial insurance policies often have inadequate depth and breadth of coverage for services such as home care or occupational therapy. In addition, many of these policies have high deductibles and copayments or a lifetime ceiling on benefits. Families of CSHCN may find themselves without coverage for their child's health care needs after facing health care costs of several hundred thousands of dollars.
Managed care — Classic managed care offers some potential benefits for CSHCN, including care coordination, preventive services, improved access to and satisfaction with primary care, and decreased out-of-pocket cost for covered services [50]. Participation in well-planned managed care can result in improved satisfaction with care [51].
On the other hand, potential disadvantages of managed care for children with special health care needs exist and may include [52,53]:
●Limited access to and choice of specialty service providers
●Increased out-of-pocket costs for out-of-network services
●Disruption of long-standing doctor-patient relationships if the managed care plan has a limited panel of providers
●Provision of specialty care by specialists in adult medicine, rather than pediatric subspecialists
●Adverse panel profiling by the managed care organization for the primary care provider who cares for numerous CSHCN
●Reduced service use compared with CSHCN with fee-for-service insurance, particularly when capitated programs carve out services
Seven design elements recommended to enhance preventive and primary care for CSHCN under managed care include [54]:
●Specially trained primary care providers
●Improved screening and risk assessment
●Multidisciplinary teams for evaluation and diagnosis
●Individual and group health education
●Flexible gatekeeping arrangements
●Comprehensive case management services
●Coordination with public health, education, and social services
Managed care organizations that care for the population of CSHCN should be monitored for [55]:
●Access to care
●Utilization of services
●Quality of care
●Satisfaction with care
●Expenditures for care
●Health outcomes
●Family impact
MEDICAL HOME — The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) describes the medical home as a care system that seeks and acknowledges a shared responsibility with the family and the community for the complete care of the child and provides medical care that is [56,57]:
●Accessible, using a community-based team if possible
●Comprehensive, including preventive, primary, and specialty care
●Continuously available
●Coordinated across time and the continuum of care
●Compassionate and family centered
●Culturally competent
The benefits of a medical home for children with chronic conditions include streamlined care for the child and family; efficient use of limited resources; decreased out-of-pocket expenditures; expanded expertise and competence for the involved providers; establishment of a forum for problem solving; and improved satisfaction for the patient, family, and provider [58,59]. In addition, the medical home provides an effective model for implementing successful transitions for children with special health care needs (CSHCN) as they grow up [60]. (See 'Transitioning: The special-needs child grows up' below.)
Pediatric primary care providers and families may be reluctant to have the primary care office serve as the medical home. Providers may wonder whether they are qualified to care for CSHCN [24,61], and families may prefer to receive all their child's care at the tertiary care center where the specialists exist. However, active involvement of the primary care provider improves coordination of services and patient/family and provider satisfaction [58,62].
Pediatric health care providers must be prepared to advocate actively for needed resources and to assure that these young people and their families receive the medical, developmental, social, and emotional support they need. The pediatric primary care provider has many roles in the care of the child with special needs [24]. He or she:
●Assures the provision of preventive services, including immunizations, screening, and anticipatory guidance
●Assists in differentiation of acute intercurrent illnesses from acute exacerbation of the underlying chronic condition
●Encourages "routine" management of the chronic condition
●Assures good communication between the family and all providers involved in the child's care
●Is familiar with available community resources and serves as a liaison between these services and the child's other providers
●Understands the child in the context of his or her family and community
●Serves as the leader of the child's care team, providing the family with the information necessary to set realistic goals
●Promotes normal growth and development for the child and family
●Focuses on the child, rather than the condition
The provision of health care for the child with special needs is more time consuming than is the provision of care for the healthy child. The care may seem less burdensome to the pediatric health care provider if he or she is able to allow these children to have extended appointments, develop appointment-tracking systems to ensure continuity of care, and use problem-oriented medical records. A nurse practitioner can assist in the care of these patients by functioning as the case manager or by assuming the care of healthy children so the pediatric health care provider can focus on the child with special needs. Assistance in coordination of care may be available from other members of the office staff, local public health department, state Title V case managers, or case managers from the tertiary-care center where the child receives specialty care. The cost of care coordination in the primary care office may be reimbursable by appropriately documenting services rendered and coded as such [63].
The Center for Medical Home Improvement (CHMI) provides information and resources for pediatric health care providers who would like to establish a medical home for their patients with special health care needs.
TRANSITIONING: THE SPECIAL-NEEDS CHILD GROWS UP — Approximately 90 percent of children with special health care needs (CSHCN) survive into adulthood [64]. The transition to self-sufficiency, financial independence, and adult care providers poses particular problems [65]:
●The developmental and psychosocial needs of the young adult with special health care needs often are difficult to meet in an environment designed for school-age children.
●Adolescents and young adults with special needs must learn to cope with emerging issues of sexuality.
●The young adult with special needs may have difficulty making decisions regarding education and vocational choices because of developmental problems or family dependency.
●The transition to a new adult care provider may interrupt the continuity of coordination of care; patients may be hesitant to break long-standing and trusted relationships with their pediatric providers.
●Internists and the staff of adult inpatient units or outpatient clinics often have little or no training or experience in caring for patients with conditions like spina bifida or cystic fibrosis.
●Young adults with chronic illness may be terminated from their parents' health coverage at the age of 21 years or the completion of college education and will need to become financially self-sufficient. When this occurs, they may encounter major difficulties in securing adequate health insurance on their own.
The medical, psychologic, developmental, and social implications for this rapidly growing population often remain unaddressed by the health care system, and unfortunately, funding to develop appropriate "transitioning" programs is rarely available [66].
Transition planning
Self-sufficiency — Pediatric health care providers can help prepare their young patients for self-sufficiency and independent living by helping the parents of these children begin to think about the future as early as possible [67]. Health care providers can ask the parents questions to encourage them to think and plan for the future:
●"Have you thought about what your toddler might do after he or she finishes high-school?"
●"Does your child have a special interest or talent that can be a starting place for thinking about future work or career?" [67]
Families should be encouraged to allow the child to try new things and to include the child in programs and activities with typically developing children.
Pediatric health care providers can continue to facilitate planning for the future by initiating prevocational counseling during early childhood and encouraging exploration of various careers through part-time jobs, volunteer work, or mentorship during the primary and secondary school years [68]. Adolescents with special needs should be encouraged to take responsibility for self-care, budgeting an allowance, and household chores [68].
If possible, health care providers should facilitate connection with families of older CSHCN (eg, through formal support and information organizations or informal connections among patient families). These connections can provide support and enable one family to benefit from the other's experiences (both positive and negative). The family of the older child provides a valuable source of information for developing a vision for the future [67].
Planning for transition should be part of the annual individualized education program (IEP) for all students who receive special education services between 14 years of age and graduation [24]. The plan should include a program to teach self-determination and leadership skills and should be based upon the student's preferences in the areas of employment, community living, recreation, relationships, transportation, and community integration. The involvement of a multispecialty team may facilitate a successful transition. In one retrospective cohort study, physically disabled adolescents whose transition to adulthood services was team based (including a consultant in rehabilitation medicine, psychologist, social worker, and various therapists) were 2.5 times more likely to participate in society than those whose transition was handled in an ad hoc manner, despite similar resource use by both groups [69].
Health care — The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP), and the American College of Physicians-American Society of Internal Medicine (ACP-ASIP) have developed a consensus statement on health care transitions for young adults with special health care needs [70]. The goal of the transition is to maximize lifelong functioning and potential through the provision of continuous, high-quality, developmentally appropriate health care services as the individual moves from adolescence to adulthood. Important aspects of ensuring a successful transition include:
●The identification of a health care professional who assumes responsibility for current care, care coordination, future care planning, and attends to the challenges of transition [70]; the transition is facilitated when the pediatric health care provider speaks directly with the internist or family clinician who will assume care and provides a written copy of the medical summary described below.
●The preparation and maintenance of an up-to-date medical summary that is portable and accessible [70]; the summary should include pertinent medical history, surgery, therapies, medications, and immunizations [24].
●The creation of a written health care transition plan by age fourteen years [70]; the adolescent and family should participate in the formulation of the plan; at a minimum, the plan should include the services that need to be provided and identification of who will provide the services and how they will be financed.
●The application of the same guidelines for primary and preventive care for all adolescents and young adults, including those with special health care needs. (See"Guidelines for adolescent preventive services", section on 'Comprehensive guidelines for adolescents'.)
The medical home model provides an effective means for facilitating the transition to adult health care, since the components of the transition are similar to the components of the medical home (table 4) [60]. (See 'Medical home' above.)
Resources — A list of resources to help health care providers, patients, and families address the transition to adulthood is available in the table (table 5).
GOALS FOR 2020 — The needs of children with special health care needs (CSHCN) are complicated and often overwhelming to the child and the family. The pediatric health care provider must be prepared to provide a medical home to address the child's and family's complex problems. The Maternal and Child Health Bureau of the United States government has identified two goals to meet for children with special health care needs by the year 2020 [71]:
●Increase the proportion of children, including those with special health care needs, who have access to a medical home
●Increase the proportion of CSHCN who receive their care in family-centered, comprehensive, coordinated systems
Goals for 2010 that continue to be important include [72]:
●All families of CSHCN will have adequate private and/or public health insurance to pay for the services they need
●All children will be screened early and continuously for special health care needs
●Families of CSHCN will partner in decision-making at all levels and will be satisfied with the services they receive
●Community-based service systems will be organized so families can use them easily
●All youth with special health care needs will receive the services necessary to make transitions to all aspects of adult life, including adult health care, work, and independence
The commitment of local pediatric health care providers, in concert with their local and state health departments, the American Academy of Pediatrics, and locally available services, is key in meeting these goals.
FAMILY RESOURCES — The following websites provide advocacy and educational resources for parents and health care providers:
●American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)
●Americans with Disabilities (ADA) Technical Assistance
●Center for Parent Information and Resources
●Family Voices
●National Information Center For Children with Disabilities
●The National Respite Locator service
●Parent Advocacy Coalition for Educational Rights (PACER)
●Special Education Resources on the Internet (SERI)
SUMMARY
●Children with special health care needs (CSHCN) are those who have or are at increased risk of developing a chronic physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional condition and who also require health and related services of a type or amount beyond that usually required by children. (See 'Definitions' above.)
●Respiratory diseases, speech and intelligence impairments, and mental/nervous system disorders are the most common activity-limiting conditions in children. (See'Epidemiology' above.)
●Chronic health conditions have biologic, developmental, psychologic, and social implications for children and their families. (See 'Implications of chronic conditions in childhood' above.)
●Chronic conditions also affect the family's economic status. The costs of health care of children with special needs are paid in several ways (eg, Medicaid, supplemental security income (SSI), Title V of the Social Security Act, commercial insurance, and managed care). (See 'Financial issues' above.)
●A "medical home" model of care provides several benefits for children with chronic medical conditions and their providers, including streamlined care; efficient use of limited resources; expanded expertise and competence for the involved providers; establishment of a forum for problem solving; and improved satisfaction. (See 'Medical home' above.)
●The transition to self-sufficiency, financial independence, and adult care providers requires advance planning and preparation. A list of resources to help patients, families, and health care providers through this transition is available in the table (table 5). (See 'Transitioning: The special-needs child grows up' above.)
●Advocacy and educational resources for parents and health care providers are listed above. (See 'Family resources' above.)

