Overview of approach to long-term survivors of head and neck cancer
INTRODUCTION — The term “cancer survivor” has been used variably in the literature; in general, a cancer survivor refers to any person who has been diagnosed with cancer until the end of life [1]. There are more than half a million survivors who have been rendered cured of head and neck cancer in the United States today [2]. The steady increase in the rate of head and neck cancer survivors is likely due to advances in treatment, decrease in smoking rates, and the improved prognosis associated with the now recognized and improved prognosis from oropharyngeal carcinomas associated with human papillomavirus (HPV) infection [3].

This topic will review the long-term issues of survivors of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), specifically discussing the group of survivors who are without evidence of disease for at least five years. Other topics that discuss complications and quality of life in patients following a diagnosis of head and neck cancer are covered separately.

●(See "Quality of life in head and neck cancer".) 
●(See "Management and prevention of complications during initial treatment of head and neck cancer".)
●(See "Management of late complications of head and neck cancer and its treatment".)
OVERVIEW OF HEAD AND NECK CANCER

Diagnosis and staging — Head and neck cancer, mostly squamous cell carcinoma, are those arising from one of five anatomic regions of the head and neck: (See "Overview of the diagnosis and staging of head and neck cancer", section on 'Classification'.)

●The oral cavity (lips, buccal mucosa, anterior tongue, floor of the mouth, hard palate, and upper and lower gingiva
●The pharynx (nasopharynx, oropharynx, and hypopharynx)
●The larynx (supraglottic, glottic, and subglottic regions)
●The nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses (maxillary, ethmoid, sphenoid, and frontal)
●The salivary glands (parotid, submandibular, sublingual, and the minor glands)
The initial assessment of the primary tumor is based upon a combination of inspection, palpation, indirect mirror examination, and direct endoscopy. Fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNA) is frequently used to make an initial tissue diagnosis of a head and neck cancer when a patient presents with a neck mass (metastatic cervical lymph node) without an obvious primary mucosal/upper aerodigestive tract site. However, an examination under anesthesia often is performed to best characterize the extent of the tumor, to look for synchronous second primary tumors, and to take biopsies for a tissue diagnosis. (See "Overview of the diagnosis and staging of head and neck cancer", section on 'Initial evaluation' and "Overview of the diagnosis and staging of head and neck cancer", section on 'Fine needle aspiration biopsy'.)

In general, a metastatic work-up with appropriate imaging is recommended for all newly-diagnosed head and neck cancer patients. Patients with severe dysplasia or carcinoma in-situ who have a strong smoking, alcohol or family history of cancer also benefit from metastatic work-up. (See "Overview of the diagnosis and staging of head and neck cancer", section on 'Imaging studies'.)

The Tumor Node Metastases (TNM) staging system of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) and the International Union for Cancer Control (UICC) is used to classify cancers of the head and neck [4]. The T classifications indicate the extent of the primary tumor and are site specific; there is considerable overlap in the cervical node (N) classifications.

TNM staging is based upon the primary tumor site:

●Oral cavity (table 1) (see "Treatment of early (stage I and II) head and neck cancer: The oral cavity", section on 'Anatomy and staging')
●Nasopharynx (table 2) (see "Treatment of early and locoregionally advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma", section on 'Staging and pathology')
●Oropharynx (table 3) (see "Treatment of early (stage I and II) head and neck cancer: The oropharynx", section on 'Staging')
●Hypopharynx (table 4) (see "Treatment of early (stage I and II) head and neck cancer: The hypopharynx", section on 'Anatomy and staging')
●Larynx (table 5) (see "Treatment of early (stage I and II) head and neck cancer: The larynx", section on 'Staging and anatomy')
●Nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses (table 6) (see "Tumors of the nasal cavity", section on 'Diagnosis and staging' and "Cancer of the nasal vestibule", section on 'Staging' and "Paranasal sinus cancer", section on 'Diagnosis and staging')
●Salivary glands (table 7) (see "Salivary gland tumors: Epidemiology, diagnosis, evaluation, and staging", section on 'Staging')
Treatment — The management of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is based on whether the disease is early or advanced stage (table 8) at presentation and the primary site of the tumor. (See "Overview of treatment for head and neck squamous cell cancer".)

●Patients with early (stage I and II) HNSCC are generally managed with single modality treatment, consisting of either surgery or radiation therapy (RT). Tumors <4cm in size fall in this category. The decision regarding the treatment modality of choice is based on patient preference, availability of the modality and sometimes due to contraindications to one vs. the other.
●Patients with locoregionally advanced (stage III, IVA, and IVB) cancers (tumors> 4cm in size or with small primary tumor but nodal involvement) are typically managed with multimodality treatment with organ preservation an important objective of therapy. Such patients should receive care from a multidisciplinary team with specific expertise in the treatment of HNSCC. Surgery followed by radiation based therapy; concurrent chemoradiotherapy and sequential therapy (induction chemotherapy followed radiation based treatment) are different standards of care available.
•For patients with a locoregionally advanced oral cavity primary (eg, primary cancers of the lip, floor of mouth, oral tongue, lower alveolar ridge, upper alveolar ridge, retromolar trigone, hard palate, and buccal mucosa), surgical treatment is usually performed first followed by postoperative RT with or without chemotherapy). (See "Treatment of locoregionally advanced (stage III and IV) head and neck cancer: The oral cavity".)
•For patients with a locoregionally advanced oropharynx cancer (eg, primary cancers of the soft palate, tonsils, base of tongue, pharyngeal wall, or vallecula), combined modality therapy is generally administered. Concurrent chemoradiation or sequential therapy (induction chemotherapy followed by radiation based treatment) is generally utilized. Treatment may consist of surgery followed by RT or chemoradiation if the disease is resectable. (See "Treatment of locoregionally advanced (stage III and IV) head and neck cancer: The oropharynx".)
•For patients with a locoregionally advanced primary of the larynx or hypopharynx, concurrent chemoradiation or sequential therapy (induction chemotherapy followed by radiation based therapy) are used as functional organ preservation strategies. (See "Treatment of locoregionally advanced (stage III and IV) head and neck cancer: The larynx and hypopharynx".)
●Because HNSCC frequently metastasizes to the cervical nodes, treatment of the neck is a routine part of treatment.
Specific discussions for the management of early versus advanced disease by primary site are covered separately.

●Tumors of the oral cavity (See "Treatment of early (stage I and II) head and neck cancer: The oral cavity" and "Treatment of locoregionally advanced (stage III and IV) head and neck cancer: The oral cavity".)
●Tumors of pharynx (See "Treatment of early and locoregionally advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma" and "Treatment of early (stage I and II) head and neck cancer: The oropharynx" and "Treatment of locoregionally advanced (stage III and IV) head and neck cancer: The oropharynx" and "Treatment of early (stage I and II) head and neck cancer: The hypopharynx" and "Treatment of locoregionally advanced (stage III and IV) head and neck cancer: The larynx and hypopharynx".)
●Tumors of the larynx (See "Treatment of early (stage I and II) head and neck cancer: The larynx" and "Treatment of locoregionally advanced (stage III and IV) head and neck cancer: The larynx and hypopharynx".)
●Tumors of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses (See "Tumors of the nasal cavity" and "Paranasal sinus cancer".)
●Tumors of the salivary glands (See "Salivary gland tumors: Treatment of locoregional disease".)
Prognosis — The prognosis of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) depends on stage at presentation and the site of involvement. Five-year overall survival in patients with stage I or stage II disease is typically 70 to 90 percent. The prognosis for patients who present with more advanced (stage III or IV) disease is poorer. As an example, patients with locoregionally advanced laryngeal carcinoma are approximately 40 percent at five-years. However, in patients with tobacco and alcohol related cancers, a 20 percent rate of second malignancy might be expected over five years.

For patients with an oropharyngeal HNSCC, prognosis is also associated with whether or not the cancer is related to HPV. For patients with locoregionally advanced oropharyngeal cancer, HPV is associated with long term survival rates of approximately 80 percent [5-9]. The overall improvement in survival for oropharyngeal cancer may be due to this epidemiologic shift [10,11].

GUIDELINES FOR FOLLOW-UP AND SURVEILLANCE OF THE LONG-TERM SURVIVOR — In general, the intensity of follow-up is greatest in the first two to four years following diagnosis, since approximately 80 to 90 percent of all recurrences occur within this timeframe. However, patients should continue to be followed beyond five years because of the risk of late complications, as well as the risk of late recurrence or second malignancies. This may be especially important for patients with non-HPV associated oropharyngeal cancers. (See "Posttreatment surveillance of squamous carcinoma of the head and neck".)

There are no data to guide the continued follow-up of the long-term head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) survivor. In general, these patients are seen for visits with an oncologist on an annual basis, highlighting the importance of coordinated care.

Components of follow-up — An overview of cancer survivorship for both primary care physicians and oncology clinicians is covered separately. While not specific to HNSCC survivors, the issues discussed are relevant to this population as well. (See "Overview of cancer survivorship care for primary care and oncology providers".)

Follow up of head and neck survivors should include:  

●History, including screening for any symptoms that might suggest a local recurrence (eg, new swelling, cough, dysphagia) or metastatic disease (eg, shortness of breath). There is no role of routine serial imaging in long-term survivors of head and neck cancer unless otherwise indicated by new signs or symptoms. Surveillance for recurrences is based on detailed clinical examination and fiberoptic visualization by the multidisciplinary treatment team.
●The history should also include any interval changes in the social environment (including partner status, life events, living arrangements, and occupational issues), lifestyle factors (eg, smoking and alcohol consumption), and an evaluation of sexual health and body image issues.
●Physical exam, including thorough inspection of the head and neck region.
●Encouragement of a healthy lifestyle, including assessment of diet and encouragement to remain (or become more) physically active (See "The roles of diet, physical activity, and body weight in cancer survivorship".)
●Encouragement and education about cessation of smoking and the limiting of alcohol consumption for any survivor who continues to partake in either or both. (See 'Smoking and alcohol cessation' below and "Management of late complications of head and neck cancer and its treatment", section on 'Smoking cessation' and "Overview of cancer survivorship care for primary care and oncology providers", section on 'Alcohol'.)
● Age-appropriate screening for other malignancies.
Smoking and alcohol cessation — Encouragement and education about cessation of smoking and the limiting of alcohol consumption for any survivor who continues to partake in either or both is critical. Higher rates of secondary cancers are seen in survivors who continue to smoke or consume alcohol [12,13]. Due to the synergistic effects of alcohol and smoking survivors exposed to both together are at higher risk for recurrence [14]. Even light alcohol consumption of less than one drink per day has been shown to be associated with oral cavity, oropharyngeal and esophageal cancers in a recently published meta-analysis [15]. Aggressive counseling for lifestyle modification including smoking and alcohol cessation should be provided at each follow up visit. A combination of behavioral support and pharmacologic therapy may be needed. (See "Overview of smoking cessation management in adults" and "Psychosocial treatment of alcohol use disorder".)

LATE AND LONG-TERM COMPLICATIONS — Much of our understanding of the issues in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) survivors come from evaluations of patients followed for two to three years after treatment, although there are several landmark papers describing issues of long-term survivors [16-21]. As a result, there are little data to inform the issues experienced in long-term HNSCC survivors who are without evidence of disease for five years or more. Much of what is covered below is based on our clinical experience.

Head and neck toxicity

Dental complications and oral health — Dental care and follow-up are very important, especially after RT to the head and neck area. Worsening of dental health after treatment is common and could lead to significant compromise in quality of life of the long-term head and neck cancer survivors. Deterioration of dental and oral health is thought to be secondary to xerostomia, change in salivary pH to acidic, demineralization, and decreased vascularity associated with radiation [16,22]. Gradual dental decline, xerostomia and difficulties with ill-fitting dentures, coupled with the financial limitations including the lack of proper dental insurance coverage, can add to the burden of long-term survivors. In addition, inadequate dental rehabilitation results in a compromised ability to eat and has been directly linked to poor quality of life due to compromised eating and chronic pain [16].

Although data on the late effects of mucositis are limited, the patient’s dental status at one year post-treatment appears to be a strong predictor of quality of life of survivors 5 years from completion of therapy [17]. The incidence of post-radiation dental caries increases 50-fold post-radiation and is seen at a rate of 2.5 per month [22,23]. They are often highly destructive and lead to extractions and osteoradionecrosis in up to 15 percent of irradiated head and neck cancer patients [24,25]. Dental status was found to have a direct impact on eating in public, chewing, swallowing, and normalcy of diet [16].

Patients undergoing radiation for head and neck cancers may develop mucosal atrophy and telangiectasias, and may experience chronic mucosal pain and sensitivity [26] Patients often describe the mucosal pain as a burning or a scalded sensation that may represent neuropathy. Hot and/or spicy and acidic foods and dry air reportedly exacerbate symptoms. Mucosal sensitivity may permanently alter food choices in this population.

Management emphasizes attention to the risk factors of hyposalivation, mucosal infection, and the neuropathic components of pain associated with mucositis [26]. Timely dental rehabilitation including dental restoration, dental prosthesis development and fitting may help improve quality of life of survivors. Further discussion on the complications and treatment guidelines for cancer survivors is covered separately. (See "Oral health in cancer survivors", section on 'Approach to the cancer patient'.)

Xerostomia — Xerostomia or dry mouth is common in most head and neck cancer survivors who have undergone radiation as a part of their treatment. It remains one of the main late complications of radiation therapy and a leading cause of compromise of quality of life of head and neck cancer survivors. There can be gradual recovery of some salivary secretion over time, with maximum recovery one to two years post-therapy [27-33], but this depends on the total radiation dose to the gland tissue. Xerostomia is a long lasting and frequently permanent problem that adversely impacts quality of life, even years after diagnosis.  

In long-term survivors (>5 years from treatment), xerostomia has been reported as dry mouth, sticky saliva, persistent need to drink water or fluids while eating, swallowing and speaking, difficulty eating and speaking, early dental decline and poor oral health [18,19]. In one study, xerostomia was present in 64 percent of long-term survivors at a mean follow-up of 9.6 years following RT [20]. In a recently published study of long-term quality of life of head and neck survivors at 5 years post IMRT, nearly 84 percent survivors reported saliva “of normal consistency” or “less saliva than normal but enough” and only 16% reported “too little saliva” [34]. (See "Treatment of locoregionally advanced (stage III and IV) head and neck cancer: The oropharynx", section on 'Radiation schedule and technique'.)

The management of xerostomia is discussed separately. (See "Management of late complications of head and neck cancer and its treatment", section on 'Salivary gland damage and xerostomia'.)

Osteoradionecrosis — Osteoradionecrosis can be seen in patients needing dental restorations or extractions in previously radiated areas [35,36]. The incidence of osteoradionecrosis with conventional radiation or IMRT is in the range of 5 to 7 percent. (See "Management of late complications of head and neck cancer and its treatment", section on 'Osteoradionecrosis and soft tissue necrosis' and "Oral health in cancer survivors", section on 'Osteonecrosis'.)

Trismus — Trismus or lockjaw could occur in up to 35 percent of head and neck cancer patients following radiation and in patients treated with surgery [37,38]. However, these estimates appear to be lower for patients treated with IMRT (5 to 15 percent) [37,39]. More commonly seen after oral cavity, oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal cancer therapy, trismus is caused by inflammation and fibrosis of the pterygoid and masseter muscles. It has an important repercussion on quality of life and could lead to poor dental hygiene, worsening xerostomia, and dental complications [37].

Active and passive exercise should be initiated as soon as post treatment fibrosis becomes evidence because left untreated, it may impact the range of jaw movement. Unfortunately, once there is restriction clinically evident it is difficult to reverse. Pentoxifylline and botulinum toxin have been used to treat established trismus in long-term survivors with some evidence of a symptomatic benefit, although no objective improvement of trismus was seen [40,41]. (See "Oral health in cancer survivors", section on 'Trismus' and "Management of late complications of head and neck cancer and its treatment", section on 'Trismus'.)

Dysphagia — Patients treated for HNSCC can experience dysphagia during treatment and as both an acute and long-term complication. Speech and swallowing impairment are seen in over 50 percent of head and neck cancer patients even before the start of treatment [42]. In addition, impaired speech and swallow function are common after oral or oropharyngeal surgery and in over 50 percent of patients undergoing partial laryngectomy [43,44]. Subsequent malnutrition and unintended weight loss can also exacerbate dysphagia, as a result of a reduction in the will to eat and a more global psychologic toll on mental state.

A number of factors may result or worsen dysphagia in long-term survivors, including:

●Loss of normal anatomic structures and/or altered relationships between normal structures (eg, loss of the hard palate or part of the larynx)  
●Radiation-induced xerostomia and fibrosis
●Problems with dentition
●Trismus
Dysphagia may also results as a consequence of esophageal stenosis, which can occur as a late complication of progressive RT-related fibrosis. The rate of long-term grade 3 esophageal strictures appears to be higher for patients treated with IMRT and are thought to be as a result of greater dose of radiation to pharyngeal constrictor muscles [45,46]. In one study, the risk of a pharyngoesophageal stricture with IMRT and conventional RT was 16.7 and 5.7 percent, respectively [46].

Patients who develop an esophageal stricture may present with subtle or significant complaints, including dysphagia (eg, feeling “something getting stuck in the throat/chest”) or changing patterns of cough when swallowing food, indicating possible episodes of aspiration. New symptoms or other more subtle changes in a patient’s normal swallowing pattern should warrant a work-up to rule out esophageal stenosis, especially if these symptoms are persistent. (See "Overview of dysphagia in adults", section on 'Diagnostic testing'.)

Even for patients who present with long-standing dysphagia, we believe there is a role for cancer rehabilitation, including speech and language therapists. Therapy consisting of swallowing exercises and maneuvers, neuromuscular stimulation and education regarding the importance of lifestyle modification (eg, changing the food consistency to prevent aspiration) can help prevent worsening (or more significant) morbidity. Speech and swallow rehabilitation is an inherent part of the multi-disciplinary team involved in treatment. The rehabilitation services are freely available in the community as well. Dysphagia as a late complication of HNSCC treatment and the role of rehabilitation is covered separately. (See "Management of late complications of head and neck cancer and its treatment", section on 'Dysphagia' and "Speech and swallowing rehabilitation of the patient with head and neck cancer".)

Feeding tube utilization — Despite preventive measures employed prior to and/or during treatment, 10 to 25 percent of HNSCC survivors become feeding tube dependent for life [19,47]. This is seen in survivors with compromised oral cavity function due to treatment or those who have had multiple episodes of aspiration. The psychosocial burden of clinically significant dysphagia should be recognized and patients referred for counseling and support in order to prevent depression and distress in survivors (and in their caregivers).

Neuromuscular toxicity — Several neuromuscular complications may occur in long-term HNSCC survivors. These include: speech difficulties, chronic pain, ototoxicity, and/or peripheral or autonomic neuropathies. These are discussed below.

Speech intelligibility — Speech and articulation could be significantly impaired after treatment for oral cavity cancer, floor of the mouth or alveolar crest cancers, cancers requiring mandibular resection, and with total or partial glossectomy [48-50]. Voice and phonation issues affect patients with laryngeal cancer treated with chemoradiation and patients who have had a laryngectomy [51]. (See "Speech and swallowing rehabilitation of the patient with head and neck cancer".)

Due to complications of total laryngectomy — Although long-term survivors are usually acclimated to the surgical outcomes, total laryngectomy continues to impart a high impact on quality of life of survivors even years after surgery [52]. Despite a multi-disciplinary follow up, long-term rehabilitation with these prostheses could be difficult and require guidance and support [53]. For patients who undergo voice rehabilitation with tracheoesophageal voice prosthesis, leakage from the site may add to long-term morbidity [54,55].

Lack of motivation, discouragement, depression and continued need for life style modification could have a cumulative impact on long-term survivors. Providers should be aware of the difficulty that can be experienced post-laryngectomy and provide continued support, counseling and specialized care wherever needed. (See 'Psychosocial issues of the caregivers' below.)

Due to recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy — Recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy could occur as a rare late complication of head and neck radiation (mostly reported with conventional radiotherapy) leading to delayed mobility of vocal cord(s) and hoarseness [56,57]. It could lead to voice strain and speech unintelligibility in survivors several years from completion of therapy that could be frustrating. Speech rehabilitation and Botulinum injection in the vocal cords have limited benefit with temporary results and life style modification may be the only option in some cases [58].

Speech therapy is required to improve speech intelligibility. Advances in reconstructive surgical techniques with tissue transfer, mandibular plates, and palatal prosthesis have been helpful [59-61]. Voice therapy is indicated in patients with hoarseness and problems with phonation after chemoradiation for glottic cancer [62]. Speech rehabilitation after total laryngectomy could be challenging and requires motivation and perseverance. It could involve an artificial larynx, transesophageal puncture, or esophageal voice production [63,64].

Chronic pain — Chronic pain (including somatic, neuropathic, and neuralgic pain) involving the head or neck after treatment can be debilitating and is reported by as many as 15 percent of all cancer survivors over five years post-treatment [65]. Chronic pain has been known to contribute to functional limitation and employment in survivors. Nearly 40 percent of unemployed long-term survivors reported being in chronic pain [66].

Although there is limited data beyond five years post treatment, in one study, nearly 18 percent of head and neck survivors complained of chronic pain as a long-term effect of prior cancer-related treatment [17]. In this study chronic pain, type of diet and dental status at one year were strongly predictive of quality of life of these survivors at the five-year post treatment time point. However, in a different study, the mean chronic pain scores (measured using the Head and Neck Cancer Inventory social disruption scores) showed there was no difference in pain scores among those who had received chemoradiation verses surgery followed by adjuvant radiation based therapy [18]. Among the more recognized pain syndromes, should and neck pain are two recognizable neuropathic conditions, particularly for those who underwent a neck dissection.

Interventions with drugs like gabapentin and carbamazepine, utilization of pain management services for treatment with narcotics and behavioral therapy, and incorporation of physical therapy may all be needed for appropriate pain control. Acupuncture has been shown to reduce pain and shoulder dysfunction after neck dissection [67]. (See "Acupuncture" and "Treatment of neck pain".)

Ototoxicity — Both cisplatin and radiation could lead to compromise in hearing. Cisplatin induced ototoxicity is well recognized and is known occur as a result of cisplatin-induced damage of the outer hair cells of cochlea. Radiation to the cochlea has been known to induce sensory neural hearing loss. Cisplatin given concurrently with radiation lowers the dose of radiation needed lead to hearing loss. The incidence ranges from 20 to 40 percent at one year post treatment with IMRT to over 40 percent at 5 years with conventional radiation [68]. The interindividual variation in the degree of cisplatin-induced toxicity endured is thought to be dependent on polymorphisms in the glutathione-S-transferases and other genetic variations [69]. For such cases, hearing augmentation may be required to improve quality of life and functioning. (See "Management of late complications of head and neck cancer and its treatment".)

Peripheral neuropathy — Long-term survivors may have to deal with residual peripheral neuropathy, both from cisplatin and taxanes. Peripheral neuropathy of some degree could be seen in over 80 percent of patients who have received 300 mg/m2 of cumulative dose of cisplatin [70]. The neuropathy usually improves over time, but complete resolution is rarely seen [71]. No preventative strategy has been of benefit as per an analysis [72].

Autonomic dysfunction — Autonomic dysfunction usually presents as dizziness and near syncope, and it has been reported in long-term survivors, especially for those who received RT to the neck [73]. RT induces inflammation of the intimal layer which is thought to result in fibrosis of the arterial walls of the neck. This is thought to contribute to the stiffening of the carotid sinus baroreceptors leading to decreased baroreceptor sensitivity, which causes blood pressure lability, including the onset of orthostasis like phenomenon causing near syncope or syncope like events [74].

For patients with autonomic dysfunction, baroreceptor sensitivity may be improved with exercise, particularly in older with a sedentary lifestyle [74].

Musculoskeletal complications

Lymphedema involving the neck may present as a late complication, especially in patients who underwent a neck dissection or RT. In addition, neck stiffness is a common complaint that is encountered in clinic.

Lymphedema — Lymphedema of the neck is common, although poorly recognized and reported [75,76]. It could occur after surgery or radiation to the head and neck area. Although lymphedema generally resolves with time, chronic lymphedema, if severe, could lead to permanent neck stiffness and disfigurement. Edema of the larynx and the pharynx could also be severe and cause airway obstruction and dysphagia [75,77].

Although late-onset neck lymphedema is not well studied, it is not uncommon for long-term head and neck survivors to present with acute lymphedema. In one study evaluating patients with neck lymphedema, the median time to onset of symptoms measured from the time of treatment completion was 17 months. However, the authors did not solely evaluate long term survivors; they included patients who presented with neck lymphedema between 3 and 156 months (13 years) of treatment completion [75].

Early institution of complete decongestive therapy is indicated. In our experience, it can provide quick relief of symptoms and prevent chronic complications [78]. (See "Prevention and treatment of lymphedema", section on 'Complete decongestive therapy'.)

Neck stiffness — In our experience, neck stiffness is one of the more common chronic complaints of patients in long-term follow-up. It is more commonly seen in patients who have had both neck radiation and neck surgery [79,80], and is more commonly seen in patients who have had both neck radiation and neck surgery. It is believed to be caused by fibrosis of the neck muscles as a result of the long standing effects of radiation and/or neck surgery [81].

When present, neck stiffness may have a significant impact on quality of life [82]. In one study that patients developed neck stiffness between 11 and 120 months post-treatment [82]. Unfortunately, studies around this topic are deficient.

For patients with neck stiffness, physical therapy is useful, even for late symptoms [83]. As with trismus, botulinum toxin has been utilized to reduce symptoms from radiation-induced fibrosis in long-term survivors and may be applicable to neck stiffness, spasms, discomfort and pain [40].

Damage to the carotid arteries — Following treatment of HNSCC, patients have an increased risk of stroke. However, there are no screening mechanisms in place for head and neck cancer survivors. Therefore, the prevention and management of stroke in long-term HNSCC survivors is similar to the approach of the general population and is discussed separately. (See "Management of late complications of head and neck cancer and its treatment", section on 'Carotid artery injury'.)  

Nephrotoxicity — Some degree of nephrotoxicity is seen in up to 30 percent of patients treated with cisplatin [84]. Cisplatin has been known to damage the proximal and distal tubular epithelium and collecting ducts in animals and humans [85]. Elevated creatinine levels, hypomagnesemia, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia and occasionally sodium wasting, proteinuria and albuminuria could all be seen in different combinations in long-term survivors [86,87]. Fortunately, long-term follow-up of patients exposed to cisplatin indicates that renal function remains stable or slightly improves over time. (See "Cisplatin nephrotoxicity".)  

PSYCHOSOCIAL ISSUES

Sexual dysfunction — Long-term survivors may experience difficulty with sexual function. This may have an anatomic basis (eg, chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy) or a more complex etiology related to intimacy issues and psychologic distress.  

Although sexuality is a key issue with head and neck cancer survivors, minimal attention has been given to it over time. Alterations in self-image, disfigurement, change in oral sensation and odor, anxiety, and depression have been thought to contribute. Chemotherapy could lead to altered sensation, arousal, and erectile dysfunction in men. Issues related to transmission of human papillomavirus (HPV) to a spouse or partner may add a significant burden to a relationship. A clear understanding of the issues related to HPV and its transmission is crucial [88]. A longitudinal study of nearly 300 head and neck cancer patients showed that they returned to baseline on nearly all aspects of quality of life after 12 months post-treatment, with only a few exceptions: dry mouth, sensory problems, and dissatisfaction with sexual function [89]. Unfortunately, there is a lack of data for longer term survivors of HNSCC.

Body image issues — Facial disfigurement, loss or change of organ function, fear of recurrence, death, and revised self-image could all prove challenging to adjustment. Body image reintegration and adjustment are thought to happen over time and require compassion, patience, and encouragement from the family, friends, and the treating clinician.

In a report from a larger study of body image among 280 HNSCC patients who underwent surgery, and who were <1 month to >5 years from diagnosis, over 50 percent of patients reported concerns regarding body image at the time of assessment [90]. Major concerns reported have been limitations with speech and swallowing, concerns regarding appearance and disfigurement leading to social avoidance.

Poorer quality of life scores have been reported in the setting of body image dysfunction [91]. In another study that evaluated the aesthetics in long-term survivors, moderate to severe pain, minimal oral intake, and being edentulous at one year from treatment were associated with significantly low aesthetics scores at five years [17]. In a similar report by the same group, long-term survivors who had received chemoradiation-based therapy had better aesthetics scores than the surgically treated group at five years from treatment [18].

Depression, anxiety, and mood disorders — Anxiety, mood disorder, fatigue, and depression are common in head and neck cancer patients before and after completion of therapy and were reported in nearly 30 percent of the survivors at five years from completion of therapy [17,92]. Although anxiety and depression are commonly observed clinically in long-term survivors, there is limited data analyzing this issue.

In one study, while several psychosocial parameters improved with the passage of time from diagnosis, anxiety and anger persisted and actually became more pronounced in survivors >5 years from diagnosis [93]. In another study that included 54 patients in whom data were available at 5 years, 9 and 4 percent reported being “somewhat depressed” and “extremely depressed” respectively. Significant factors that predicted depression included the presence of a tracheostomy tube or laryngeal stoma, gastrostomy tube dependence, and continued smoking at the time of follow-up. Despite these findings, there is a concern that HNSCC survivors are not being referred appropriately [21].

Clinicians must be cognizant of the risks for a mood disorder in long-term survivors, in order to ensure that patients receive the support necessary.

Employment — Over 50 percent of head and neck survivors were reported as being disabled from disease at the two year post-treatment time point [66,94]. Unfortunately, data are limited in longer-term survivors.

Despite this, a number of reasons have been reported for the continued disability of HNSCC survivors, including:

●Long-term oral dysfunction, loss of appetite, deterioration in social functions, and high anxiety levels [95]
●More advanced stage at original presentation, alcohol use, and lower educational levels [94]
●Fatigue [66]
Survivors may also face challenges related to facial disfigurement, limitations in speech intelligibility, dietary limitation, and rarely even dependence on enteral tube feeding. These issues could lead to low self-esteem, lack of initiative in socializing and competing with peers, limitations in employment opportunities, and growth at work place.

Psychosocial issues of the caregivers — Psychosocial adjustments of survivors and their caregivers are intimately linked [96]. Active counseling of the patient and family members during and after treatment play an important role in minimizing the psychosocial burden and help in rehabilitation. Long-term help and support should be provided to caregivers and family in situations where survivors have multiple long-term complications of treatment. The care of a head and neck cancer survivor could still be very involved in cases with feeding tube, tracheotomy, and other disabilities like compromised speech intelligibility.

SECONDARY CANCERS — Second primary cancers have been reported in up to 20 percent of head and neck cancer survivors and are related to smoking and alcohol exposure. For those who develop a second primary, prognosis is generally poor, with a median overall survival typically around 12 months [97].

During the last 20 years, a clear decrease in the incidence of secondary cancers in primary oropharyngeal tumors has been observed. This has been associated with an increasing incidence of HPV-related oropharyngeal carcinomas [98]. With emerging data about difference in sexual practices of HPV positive patients, longitudinal follow-up is warranted [98,99].

Lifestyle modification, smoking and alcohol cessation intervention programs are needed to help cancer survivors reduce their risks for a second primary [13]. Patients should be counseled for smoking and alcohol cessation routinely and aggressively.

COORDINATION OF CARE AND SPECIALIST REFERRAL — Care must be taken to communicate the plan of care and follow-up with the general medical provider or primary care physician. A detailed communication of the plan of care with the primary dentist is also essential. In a study of oncologists and primary care physicians, the lack of clarity of who provides specific aspects of psychosocial care to cancer survivors brought to attention the need for better survivorship care coordination with the multidisciplinary head and neck oncology team [100].

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

●Head and neck cancer, mostly squamous cell carcinoma, are those arising from one of five anatomic regions of the head and neck: the oral cavity, pharynx, larynx, nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses, or the salivary glands. (See 'Diagnosis and staging' above.)
●The steady increase in the rate of head and neck cancer survivors is likely due to advances in treatment, decrease in smoking rates, and the improved prognosis associated with the now recognized and improved prognosis from oropharyngeal carcinomas associated with human papillomavirus (HPV) infection. Today there are more than half a million survivors who have been rendered cured of head and neck cancer in the United States alone. (See 'Introduction' above.)
●The management of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is based on whether the disease is early or advanced stage at presentation and the primary site of the tumor. (See 'Treatment' above.)
•Patients with early (stage I and II) HNSCC are generally managed with single modality treatment, consisting of either surgery or radiation therapy (RT).
•Patients with advanced (stage III, IVA, and IVB) cancers are typically managed with multimodality treatment with organ preservation an important objective of therapy. Such patients should receive care from a multidisciplinary team with specific expertise in the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).
●The prognosis of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) depends on stage at presentation and the site of involvement. Five-year overall survival in patients with stage I or stage II disease is typically 70 to 90 percent. The prognosis for patients who present with more advanced (stage III or IV) disease is poorer.
●In general, the intensity of follow-up is greatest in the first two to four years following diagnosis, since approximately 80 to 90 percent of all recurrences occur within this timeframe. However, patients should continue to be followed beyond five years because of the risk of late complications, as well as the risk of late recurrence or second malignancies. This may be especially important for patients with non-HPV associated oropharyngeal cancers. (See 'Guidelines for follow-up and surveillance of the long-term survivor' above.)
●Survivors should be counseled for smoking and alcohol cessation routinely and aggressively. Second primary cancers have been reported in up to 20 percent of head and neck cancer survivors and are related to smoking and alcohol exposure. (See 'Secondary cancers' above.)
●Dental care and follow-up of oral health are very important, especially after RT to the head and neck area. Worsening of dental health after treatment is common and is mostly as a result of dry mouth or “xerostomia” from head and neck radiation. Poor oral hygiene and dental health decline could lead to significant compromise in quality of life of the long-term head and neck cancer survivors. Among common complications in these patients are mucosal sensitivity, malocclusion of teeth or dental prosthesis (dentures), osteoradionecrosis, and trismus. (See 'Dental complications and oral health' above.)
●Patients treated for HNSCC can experience dysphagia during treatment and as both an acute and long-term complication. Even for patients who present with long-standing dysphagia, we believe there is a role for cancer rehabilitation, including speech and language therapists. Despite preventive measures employed prior to and/or during treatment, 10 to 25 percent of HNSCC survivors become feeding tube dependent for life. (See 'Dysphagia' above.)
●Several neuromuscular complications may occur in long-term HNSCC survivors. These include: speech difficulties, chronic pain, ototoxicity, and/or peripheral or autonomic neuropathies. For many of these concerns, rehabilitation that involves speech and physical therapists is an important part of management. (See 'Neuromuscular toxicity' above.)  
●Lymphedema involving the neck may present as a late complication, especially in patients who underwent a neck dissection or RT. In addition, neck stiffness is a common complaint that is encountered in clinic. (See 'Musculoskeletal complications' above.)
●Survivors of HNSCC are at risk for psychosocial issues related to body image, speech unintelligibility, food related lifestyle limitations and sexual health. In addition, they are at high risk for mood disorders, including depression and anxiety. Fear of recurrence and fear regarding secondary cancers add to the burden of survivorship. Clinicians should be aware of these issues and screen for them in follow-up to ensure that these patients get the support and counseling necessary. (See 'Psychosocial issues' above.)