Elective oophorectomy or ovarian conservation at the time of hysterectomy
INTRODUCTION — Hysterectomy (surgical removal of the uterus) is the second most common major surgical procedure (cesarean section is the most common) performed among United States women [1]. Many women undergo oophorectomy at the time of hysterectomy. A 2005 United States nationwide study reported that unilateral or bilateral oophorectomy was performed in 68 percent of women at the time of abdominal hysterectomy, 60 percent at laparoscopic hysterectomy, and 26 percent at vaginal hysterectomy [2].

It has been common practice to counsel women who were in their mid-40s or older and were planning hysterectomy for benign indications to undergo concomitant bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy [3]. The rationale for this approach has been that oophorectomy greatly decreases the risk of ovarian cancer and the need for future ovarian surgery, and that there is little disadvantage, since women in this age range are close to or beyond menopause. This approach also assumed nearly universal treatment with postmenopausal hormone therapy. However, in recent decades, the debate over ovarian conservation versus elective oophorectomy at the time of hysterectomy has evolved with further understanding of potential long-term health risks and benefits of elective oophorectomy. In addition, clinical decision-making regarding hormone therapy has become more complex.

For women with gynecologic malignancies, there are often clear indications for oophorectomy. In the setting of benign disease, however, the decision to retain or remove ovaries should be based upon the long-term health effects.

An evidence-based approach to management of the ovaries at the time of hysterectomy for benign disease will be reviewed here. Techniques for oophorectomy, risk-reducing oophorectomy for women with a hereditary ovarian cancer syndrome, and general principles of menopause are discussed separately. (See "Oophorectomy and ovarian cystectomy" and "Risk-reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy in women at high risk of epithelial ovarian and fallopian tubal cancer" and "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of menopause".)

TERMINOLOGY

Elective salpingo-oophorectomy – Removal of the ovaries and fallopian tubes in a woman who has no known indication for this procedure (eg, ovarian pathology, hereditary ovarian cancer syndrome). Ovaries and tubes are typically removed, rather than the ovaries alone.

●Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy – Removal of the ovaries and fallopian tubes in a woman with a hereditary ovarian cancer syndrome. Risk reduction requires removal of the tubes as well as the ovaries because some malignancies currently categorized as ovarian cancers may arise in the tubal epithelium. (See "Risk-reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy in women at high risk of epithelial ovarian and fallopian tubal cancer".)
The term prophylactic salpingo-oophorectomy has been used inconsistently, and so will not be used in this review, except when it was the term used in a particular study. It has been used variously to refer to salpingo-oophorectomy for the prevention of ovarian cancer in either women at an average risk or those with a hereditary ovarian cancer syndrome [4,5].

SURGICAL EFFECTS ON OVARIAN FUNCTION

Surgical menopause — The ovary is an endocrine organ, with widespread physiologic effects during the postmenopausal, as well as the reproductive, years.  

In women who haven’t previously undergone natural menopause, bilateral oophorectomy or remaining oophorectomy (removal of an ovary in a woman who has previously undergone unilateral oophorectomy) results in surgical menopause. The rapid change in the reproductive hormonal milieu and abrupt symptom onset that occurs in surgical menopause contrasts with the typical gradual waxing and waning in the hormonal profile and concomitant menopausal symptoms that occur in natural menopause.

Surgical menopause results in an abrupt drop in estrogen levels, an abrupt rise in follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) level, and the complete cessation of ovarian hormone production, including androgens, estradiol, and progesterone [6-9].

By contrast, the transition into natural menopause is characterized by variable estradiol and FSH levels, in association with unpredictable ovulatory and anovulatory cycles. The variability in hormone levels is most dramatic over a period of four years, and typically continues over an interval of up to 10 years [10,11]. Ultimately, estrogen levels remain low and FSH levels high, but there is no specific hormone level profile that unequivocally characterizes the onset of natural menopause. Intact postmenopausal ovaries continue to be hormonally active for many years beyond menopause, producing androgens including testosterone, androstenedione, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), as well as very small amounts of estradiol and estrone [12]. Although estrogen secretion by the postmenopausal ovary eventually ceases, ovarian secretion of small amounts of testosterone and the androgen precursor, DHEA, may continue into the eighth decade of life [8,12].

Extraovarian sources of sex steroids throughout life include the adrenal glands and widespread target tissues, including fat, where aromatization of androgens into estrogen occurs. The extent to which extraovarian sex steroid hormone synthesis differs between women who have experienced natural versus surgical menopause has been debated [8,9], but it appears that total androgen levels remain lower after surgical menopause than after natural menopause [8].

Early menopause following hysterectomy — Hysterectomy appears to alter ovarian function over the long-term, even if the ovaries are conserved. This effect is incompletely understood, but is possibly due to impairment of the ovarian blood supply or other yet unknown mechanisms [13-16]. Observational studies have found that women who undergo hysterectomy develop menopausal symptoms and menopausal hormone profiles earlier than controls that did not have a hysterectomy. As an example, a prospective cohort study found that menopause (defined as follicle stimulating hormone ≥40 IU/L) occurred 3.7 years earlier in premenopausal women who had a hysterectomy (both ovaries retained) compared with those who did not have a hysterectomy [16]. And, among all women who underwent hysterectomy, those who had only one ovary conserved reached menopause 4.4 years earlier than those who had both ovaries conserved.

INDICATIONS FOR OOPHORECTOMY — Women who undergo hysterectomy for benign indications may also have an indication for concurrent oophorectomy. Oophorectomy in this context is not elective. However, even in this circumstance, the risk-to-benefit balance of bilateral oophorectomy should be considered.

Ovarian pathology is the usual indication for oophorectomy (eg, ovarian neoplasms). These indications are reviewed separately. (See "Oophorectomy and ovarian cystectomy", section on 'Oophorectomy versus cystectomy'.)

Some women with extraovarian pathology may also benefit from oophorectomy, including:

●Endometriosis – The risk of reoperation for endometriosis-related concerns appears to be lower if the ovaries are removed at the time of hysterectomy [17]. (See "Overview of the treatment of endometriosis", section on 'Surgical management'.)
●Tuboovarian abscess – In women requiring surgical management of tuboovarian abscess, the risk of reoperation is higher if one or both ovaries are conserved [18]. (See "Management and complications of tuboovarian abscess", section on 'Surgery'.)
●Pelvic adhesions/pelvic pain – The incidence of residual ovary syndrome, characterized by post-hysterectomy pelvic pain, is 0.9 to 3.4 percent [19]. Subsequent oophorectomy may be required to manage such symptoms. Preoperative pelvic pain and adhesions are risk factors for this syndrome. Thus, hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy has been a common approach for such patients [20].
STUDIES REGARDING ELECTIVE OOPHORECTOMY — The highest quality data regarding long-term health outcomes of elective oophorectomy compared with ovarian conservation at time of surgery are from two large prospective studies and a single retrospective cohort study discussed below; no randomized trial has investigated this issue:

●The Nurses’ Health Study was a prospective cohort study that included 29,380 women who had a hysterectomy for benign disease [21,22]. The average age at time of surgery was approximately 43 to 47 years and the average age at enrollment was 51 years; 94 percent were white; women were followed for 28 years.
●The Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study was a prospective study that included 25,448 women who had a hysterectomy for benign disease [23]. Women in this study were initially invited to participate in the Women’s Health Initiative randomized trial that evaluated postmenopausal hormone therapy, but were either found ineligible or declined to participate in the trial. The majority of women were 49 years or younger at the time of hysterectomy and the average age at enrollment was 63 years; 82 percent were white; women were followed for an average of only eight years.
●The Mayo Clinic Cohort Study of Oophorectomy and Aging was a retrospective population-based cohort study of 2365 women in Olmstead County, Minnesota who underwent unilateral or bilateral oophorectomy for benign disease; almost all women were white [24]. For some analyses, women from the cohort were compared with controls who had not had an oophorectomy and were identified via random digit telephone dialing [25]. The median age at time of surgery was 44 years among premenopausal women who had a bilateral oophorectomy and 62 years among postmenopausal women. Women who had a bilateral oophorectomy were followed for an average of 25 years; 95 percent had the oophorectomy at the time of hysterectomy. Although this study was retrospective, it includes prospective data from centralized medical records regarding the surgical, pharmacy, and outcome data for all participants. Thus, recall bias was limited and there was access to long-term follow-up data.
Findings from these studies, as well as from other relevant studies, are reviewed in the sections that follow. Data from the Women’s Health Initiative conflict with data from the Nurses’ Health Study and the Mayo Clinic Cohort Study regarding many outcomes, including risk of all-cause mortality, cardiovascular disease and osteoporotic fractures. We regard the Nurses’ Health Study as having the best available data, based upon several methodologic limitations of the Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study. Both the Nurses’ Health Study and the Mayo Clinic Cohort Study had long follow-up periods (28 to 30 years), adequate to assess outcomes that are more common for women over age 60 years: cardiovascular disease and stroke, dementia, osteoporosis, breast cancer, ovarian cancer and all-cause mortality, and shorter gaps between oophorectomy and enrollment. In contrast, women in the Women’s Health Initiative were followed for only a mean of 8 years with an average gap of 14 years from oophorectomy to enrollment. The average age at enrollment in the Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study was 63 years. Thus, women who had outcomes of interest (cardiovascular disease and stroke, dementia, osteoporosis, breast cancer, ovarian cancer and all-cause mortality) that occurred during the interval from hysterectomy to enrollment were not included, introducing a significant survivor bias to the analysis. Finally, the Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study reported that bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy did not have significant adverse effects on all-cause mortality, coronary heart disease, hip fracture, or cancer, but the study has insufficient statistical power to detect differences for these outcomes.  

BENEFITS OF ELECTIVE OOPHORECTOMY

Ovarian cancer risk reduction — Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO) reduces, but does not eliminate, the risk of developing ovarian cancer. Ovarian-like cancers of the peritoneum, known as peritoneal cancer, may develop after oophorectomy. Oophorectomy performed for ovarian cancer risk reduction should include removal of the fallopian tubes since occult primary fallopian tubal cancers have been reported in women undergoing risk-reducing BSO. (See "Epithelial carcinoma of the ovary, fallopian tube, and peritoneum: Clinical features and diagnosis", section on 'Incidental operative finding'.)

BSO is an important risk reduction strategy for women who are at high risk of ovarian cancer. The lifetime risk of ovarian cancer in the general population is 1.4 percent compared with 13 to 46 percent in women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutations (table 1) and 3 to 14 percent in those with Lynch syndrome (hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer syndrome) (figure 1) [26]. Salpingo-oophorectomy in these women is considered risk-reducing and not elective. (See "Endometrial and ovarian cancer screening and prevention in women with Lynch syndrome (hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer)" and "Risk-reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy in women at high risk of epithelial ovarian and fallopian tubal cancer" and "BRCA1 and BRCA2: Prevalence and risks for breast and ovarian cancer", section on 'Breast and ovarian cancer'.)

The degree of ovarian cancer risk reduction from hysterectomy with BSO in the general population was illustrated in prospective data from the Nurses' Health Study (see 'Studies regarding elective oophorectomy' above) [22]. The analyses were adjusted for family history of ovarian cancer and duration of oral contraceptive use. Women who underwent oophorectomy had significant reductions in ovarian cancer mortality compared with women who conserved their ovaries (hazard ration [HR] 0.06, 95% CI 0.02–0.17).

Similar results were reported by the Women’s Health Initiative Observational study, another large prospective cohort study, in which the number needed to treat to avoid one case of ovarian cancer was 323 [23].

The decision regarding BSO at time of hysterectomy is more difficult for women who have some risk factors for ovarian cancer (table 2), but who do not have, or have not been tested for, a hereditary ovarian cancer syndrome. Women for whom a familial cancer syndrome is suspected should be offered genetic counseling and testing (table 3 and table 4). Counseling of patients who have some of the known risk factors for ovarian cancer, but who do not meet criteria for a high risk of ovarian cancer, must be individualized and should include review of all advantages and disadvantages of the procedure. This is an area of uncertainty in which further research is needed to guide the practice. (See "Genetic risk assessment for individuals at risk for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndromes".)

Alternatives to BSO for ovarian cancer risk reduction — Surgical procedures other than BSO may reduce the risk of ovarian cancer, without resulting in surgical menopause.

Procedures that interrupt or remove the fallopian tubes appear to reduce the risk of ovarian cancer, but not to the same extent as BSO. Hysterectomy alone was associated with a 34 percent reduction in the risk of ovarian cancer in a meta-analysis of 12 case-control studies [27]. Tubal ligation was found to be associated with a 34 percent reduction in ovarian cancer risk in meta-analysis of case-control studies [28]. Bilateral salpingectomy alone without oophorectomy has also been proposed [29,30]. (See "Epithelial carcinoma of the ovary, fallopian tube, and peritoneum: Epidemiology and risk factors", section on 'Hysterectomy'.)

Potential mechanisms for the protective effect of these procedures include: (1) eliminating lesions that may have originated in the fallopian tubes; (2) limiting the potential for upward migration of carcinogens through the vagina, cervix, and fallopian tubes into the peritoneal cavity; and (3) providing a cancer screening effect [31].

Unilateral oophorectomy has not been proven to reduce the risk of ovarian cancer. Although this observation is counterintuitive, available data have not consistently demonstrated that removing half of the tissue at risk results in half the risk of ovarian cancer. A multicenter case-control study of 1031 women with ovarian cancer who were compared with women who did not undergo pelvic surgery found no significant decrease in ovarian cancer risk over a period of seven years in those who underwent unilateral oophorectomy either with hysterectomy (1.4 versus 2.6 percent) or without hysterectomy (1.0 versus 1.6 percent) compared with no pelvic surgery [32]. In contrast, a case-control study of 129 women with ovarian cancer found a significantly decreased rate of ovarian cancer over a period of 16 years in women who had undergone unilateral oophorectomy (2.9 versus 13.6 percent) [33]. Further study of this issue is needed.

Breast cancer risk reduction — Oophorectomy appears to reduce the risk of breast cancer in women who are 45 years old or younger at time of surgery. The reduced risk of breast cancer is likely due to reduced exposure to estrogen from the premenopausal ovary. This effect is also seen in women at high risk of breast cancer. (See "Risk-reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy in women at high risk of epithelial ovarian and fallopian tubal cancer", section on 'Breast cancer'.)

The Nurses' Health Study, a large prospective study, found that oophorectomy was associated with a significant reduction in breast cancer incidence only in women who underwent the procedure at age 47.5 years or younger (see 'Studies regarding elective oophorectomy' above) [22].

In contrast, the Women’s Health Initiative Observational study found no significant reduction in breast cancer risk in women who underwent oophorectomy compared with those who did not undergo oophorectomy; these findings can be explained by significant limitations in the study design [23]. (See 'Studies regarding elective oophorectomy' above.)

Avoiding the need for subsequent oophorectomy — Reoperation for ovarian pathology, termed residual ovary syndrome, occurred in 3 to 4 percent of women who retained one or both ovaries after hysterectomy, based upon two case series performed between 1970 and 1990 [19,34]. The majority of these surgeries were performed within five years of the hysterectomy for the indication of pelvic pain or a pelvic mass. In one series of 2561 hysterectomies, among 73 women with residual ovary syndrome, histologic examination revealed functional cysts in 51 percent, benign neoplasms in 43 percent, and ovarian carcinoma in 12 percent of cases (some patients had more than one diagnosis) [19]. The other series included 1265 women and found that the frequency of residual ovary syndrome was twice as high in women who had one ovary preserved, rather than both (7.6 versus 3.6 percent) [34]. In addition, residual ovary syndrome was more common in women who underwent hysterectomy at a young age, possibly because of the longer period of post-procedure ovarian function with a greater opportunity for functional ovarian pathology.

Some data suggest that the reoperation rate is higher in women who undergo abdominal or laparoscopic hysterectomy compared with a vaginal route [35]. The reason for such a difference is uncertain, but it could be that vaginal hysterectomy is typically not performed when ovarian pathology in one or both ovaries is suspected.

In women who require oophorectomy subsequent to hysterectomy, laparoscopic techniques have reduced the surgical morbidity of such procedures. However, surgical adhesions from prior hysterectomy may make a laparoscopic approach more difficult. One small study reported that 32 of 35 women with a prior hysterectomy were able to have a successful laparoscopic oophorectomy [20]. Thus, minimally invasive surgery will provide a solution for most women who develop ovarian pathology following hysterectomy. Therefore, the possible need for subsequent surgery does not appear to justify the deleterious long-term consequences of BSO for most women undergoing hysterectomy.

RISKS OF ELECTIVE OOPHORECTOMY

Added surgical risk — Operative complications are uncommon in women undergoing elective bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO) at the time of hysterectomy. The risk of such complications is increased if adhesions or other intraabdominal pathology are present.

The impact of BSO on surgical morbidity is controversial. This may depend somewhat upon surgical route. For hysterectomy performed via laparotomy or laparoscopy, BSO does not appreciably increase the complexity of the procedure. In contrast, when BSO is combined with vaginal hysterectomy, the procedure is potentially more difficult. The degree of difficulty depends upon the extent of descensus of the ovaries and the extent to which the ovaries can be brought into the narrow surgical field. This is consistent with the findings of a study of over two million women in the United States who underwent hysterectomy for benign indications from 1998 to 2006 [36]. There was an increase in complications when BSO was performed in women undergoing vaginal hysterectomy (odds ratio [OR] 1.12; 95% CI 1.08-1.17), but not for those who had an abdominal (OR 0.91; 95% CI 0.89-0.94) or laparoscopic hysterectomy (OR 0.89; 95% CI 0.83-0.94). (See "Abdominal hysterectomy", section on 'Adnexal conservation or removal' and "Vaginal hysterectomy", section on 'Salpingo-oophorectomy'.)

In contrast, an increase in morbidity with BSO was found in another study of over nine million women who had a hysterectomy performed between 1979 and 2004 identified via the United States National Hospital Discharge Survey database. Most were abdominal hysterectomies (84 percent); individual rates of other surgical routes were not given [37]. Although a study population with a predominantly abdominal surgical route is no longer representative of current practice, findings showed that hysterectomy with oophorectomy compared with hysterectomy alone had significantly increased risks of circulatory/bleeding complications (1.4 versus 1.2 percent; OR 1.34, 95% CI 1.05–1.70), organ injury (1.3 versus 0.9 percent; OR 1.35, 95% CI 1.02–1.79), and gastrointestinal complications (1.7 versus 0.7 percent; OR 1.76, 95% CI 1.31–2.37) [2].

The available data do not take into consideration whether the oophorectomy was elective or indicated. Some indications for oophorectomy may contribute to surgical morbidity (eg, pelvic adhesions, large adnexal mass). Further study is needed to evaluate whether elective BSO impacts surgical morbidity.

Long-term health risks — Accumulating evidence indicates that surgical removal of the ovaries may have serious long-term health consequences [21-24,38-40]. It appears that risks are greater for women who are younger at the time of oophorectomy and did not take estrogen therapy [24,38-41].

All-cause mortality — The available evidence suggests that bilateral oophorectomy at younger age is associated with increased all-cause mortality, especially among women who do not take estrogen therapy. Questions remain regarding the potential mechanism of this effect, but evidence is suggestive that hypoestrogenism may be an important factor.

The Nurses’ Health Study found that women who underwent bilateral oophorectomy had a significantly increased risk of death from all causes compared with those who conserved their ovaries (16.8 versus 13.3 percent; HR 1.13, 95% CI 1.06–1.21). (See 'Studies regarding elective oophorectomy' above.) This can also be expressed as one additional death over a period of 24 years for every 24 women who undergo bilateral oophorectomy at time of hysterectomy.

The etiology of the increase in all-cause mortality with oophorectomy in the Nurses’ Health Study is unknown, but among women younger than 50 years, the increase in risk following oophorectomy was significantly higher for those who never used estrogen therapy (HR 1.41, 95% CI 1.04–1.92) than those who had ever used, or were currently, using estrogen therapy (HR 1.05, 95% CI 0.94–1.17) [22]. Among all women, oophorectomy was associated with a significant increase in death due to lung cancer (HR 1.29, 95% CI 1.04–1.61), and colorectal cancer (HR 1.49, 95% CI 1.02–2.18).

As in the Nurses’ Health Study, younger women in the Mayo Cohort Oophorectomy and Aging Study who underwent prophylactic BSO had an increased all-cause mortality risk (HR 1.67, 95% CI 1.16-2.40) [24].

Elective and indicated oophorectomies were analyzed separately in only one study, the Mayo Cohort Study of Oophorectomy and Aging [24]. (See 'Studies regarding elective oophorectomy' above.) A significant increase in all-cause mortality compared with referent women without oophorectomy was found only in those in whom the oophorectomy was indicated due to a benign tumor or inflammation. The causes of death were not reported. The risk of death was significantly increased in women who underwent prophylactic oophorectomy compared with no oophorectomy only in those who were younger than age 45 years and did not use subsequent estrogen therapy (29 versus 26 percent). The study lacked sufficient statistical power to detect a difference in outcome in other women who underwent prophylactic oophorectomy. Further study of the distinction between indicated and elective oophorectomies is needed. (See 'Indications for oophorectomy' above.)

In contrast to findings from the Nurses’ Health Study and the Mayo Cohort Study of Oophorectomy and Aging, the Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study found no increase in mortality in women who underwent hysterectomy with bilateral oophorectomy compared to ovarian conservation, overall (797 versus 791 per 100,000 person-years; HR 0.98, 95% CI 0.87-1.10) or for any age group subset [23]. A discussion of study limitations can be found above. (See 'Studies regarding elective oophorectomy' above.)

Cardiovascular disease and stroke — The available evidence suggests that BSO at a younger age is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease [22,41,42]. It is uncertain whether an increase in cardiovascular risk is the result of early menopause, or is associated specifically with surgical menopause. Some data suggest that estrogen therapy may mitigate adverse cardiovascular effects in this patient population [21,40]. The relationship between postmenopausal hormone therapy and cardiovascular disease is discussed in detail separately. (See "Postmenopausal hormone therapy and cardiovascular risk".)

The association between cardiovascular disease and oophorectomy is supported by data from a meta-analysis and large observational studies [22,41-43]. Women who undergo bilateral oophorectomy appear to be more likely than premenopausal women to develop cardiovascular disease, based upon a meta-analysis of 18 studies that found a significantly increased risk of cardiovascular disease in women who underwent bilateral oophorectomy compared with premenopausal women (RR 2.62, 95% CI, 2.05-3.35) [42]. In contrast, no significant difference was found between natural menopause and premenopause (RR 1.14, 95% CI 0.86-1.51). Surgical menopause was not directly compared with natural menopause. Early age at oophorectomy had a deleterious effect. The increase in cardiovascular risk was significantly higher in women who underwent bilateral oophorectomy before age 50 years compared with 50 years or older (RR 4.55, 95% CI 2.56-8.01).

On the other hand, early natural menopause (≤44 years old) has been associated with an increase in the risk of cardiovascular disease in two large epidemiologic studies [44,45]. In one, this effect was limited to current smokers [44], while the second study only included women who never smoked [45]. (See "Determinants and management of cardiovascular risk in women", section on 'Menopause'.)

The Nurses’ Health Study found a significant increase in cardiovascular disease (HR 1.19, 95% CI 1.01–1.39) and an increase in coronary heart disease that was not statistically significant (HR 1.23, 95% CI 1.00–1.52) [22]. Among women younger than 50 years, the increased risk following oophorectomy was significantly higher for those who never used estrogen therapy (HR 1.60. 95% CI 0.68–3.74) than those who had ever, or were currently, using estrogen therapy (HR 1.00, 95% CI 0.76–1.33).

Similarly, among younger women in the Mayo Cohort Oophorectomy and Aging Study, women who underwent BSO and were not treated with estrogen from the time of BSO through age 45 years had an increased cardiovascular mortality risk (HR 1.84, 95% CI 1.27-2.68), while those who were treated with estrogen therapy were not found to have a significantly increased risk (HR 0.65, 95% CI 0.30-1.41), although this analysis had insufficient statistical power [40].

In contrast, the Women’s Health Initiative Observational study found no significant association between oophorectomy and coronary heart disease (380 versus 353 per 100,000 person-years; HR 1.00, 0.85-1.18); however, methodologic issues limit confidence in this finding [23]. A discussion of study limitations can be found above. (See 'Studies regarding elective oophorectomy' above.)

Neither study found a significant association overall between oophorectomy and stroke.

Cognitive function and neurologic disease — Oophorectomy prior to menopause appears to be associated with an increased risk of cognitive impairment or dementia, as well as parkinsonism. Estrogen replacement may be neuroprotective in these women. (See "Estrogen and cognitive function", section on 'Timing of exposure' and "Postmenopausal hormone therapy: Benefits and risks", section on 'Cognitive function and dementia'.)

This was illustrated in the Mayo Clinic Cohort Study of Oophorectomy and Aging [46,47]. Among women who underwent bilateral oophorectomy before menopause compared with those who did not undergo oophorectomy, a significant increase in the risk of cognitive impairment or dementia was restricted to those who were younger than 48 years old at time of surgery and who did not take estrogen therapy from time of surgery through age 50 years (HR 1.89, 95% CI 1.27–2.83).  

Small observational studies have shown a significant decrease in specific cognitive functions after bilateral oophorectomy, including verbal fluency, verbal memory, procedural learning, and some other executive functions [38,48]. Neurocognitive performance was worse when oophorectomy occurred at younger ages and worse with a greater decline in estradiol levels, but it was better when hormone therapy was initiated after oophorectomy. The extent to which observed improvements in neurocognitive performance with estrogen therapy might be attributable to improvements in sleep and relief of hot flashes versus direct effects on the brain has been debated [48].

In the Mayo Clinic Cohort Study of Oophorectomy and Aging, women who underwent bilateral oophorectomy before the onset of menopause had an increased risk of parkinsonism compared with no oophorectomy (2.6 versus 1.2 percent), and the risk increased with younger age at oophorectomy [47,49]. An increase in the risk of Parkinson’s disease was also found, but did not reach statistical significance.

Depression and anxiety — Some data suggest that early bilateral oophorectomy at the time of hysterectomy is associated with an increased risk of developing depression or anxiety [38,50,51].

The Mayo Clinic Cohort Study of Oophorectomy and Aging reported that women who had bilateral oophorectomy compared with those who did not had a significant increase in the onset of symptoms of depression (as diagnosed by a physician, 11 versus 7 percent) or anxiety (7 versus 3 percent) [38]. The median time from oophorectomy to the onset of symptoms of depression or anxiety was approximately 14 years, but differences in the rates of occurrence of anxiety and depression were observed within three years following hysterectomy, and persisted throughout more than 30 years of follow-up.

The Study of Women Across the Nation, a prospective cohort study of over 3000 women from diverse ethnic backgrounds, compared risk of depression and anxiety among women who had hysterectomy with ovarian conservation (n = 76) versus women who had hysterectomy with bilateral oophorectomy (n = 101). For all women, depressive and anxiety symptoms decreased in the years after final menstrual period or surgery [51].

Data from shorter-term studies have been inconsistent regarding the effect of bilateral oophorectomy on psychological well-being [52,53].

Sexual dysfunction — Some but not all studies report negative sexual outcomes after oophorectomy.

Adverse effects of bilateral oophorectomy can involve several different domains of sexual function, including libido, arousal, and orgasm [50]. In a survey of European women with no known increased risk of cancer, those who underwent bilateral oophorectomy were twice as likely to have hypoactive sexual desire symptoms compared with women who were premenopausal or had gone through natural menopause [54].

Greater impairment of sexual function may be associated with surgical versus natural menopause since only surgical menopause is associated with an abrupt decrease in androgen output. In a cross-sectional study of over 30,000 women, surgical, but not natural, menopause was associated with orgasm problems and the decrease in arousal was greater in women after surgical menopause [55]. Similarly, in one retrospective study of women following hysterectomy, women who had bilateral oophorectomy reported significantly decreased sexual satisfaction postoperatively, despite estrogen treatment, compared to women who had their ovaries preserved [52]. On the other hand, this result was not observed in a subsequent prospective study in which sexuality was unaltered postoperatively in women following hysterectomy with bilateral oophorectomy compared with hysterectomy only [56]. (See "Sexual dysfunction in women: Epidemiology, risk factors, and evaluation", section on 'Age and menopause'.)

Several other studies have found that overall sexual function is unaltered after oophorectomy, or that alterations were explained by preoperative sexual function, indications for surgery, severity of symptoms, and personality traits, rather than by the oophorectomy itself [3,57-59].

Osteoporosis — Menopause is a known risk factor for osteoporosis. Among women in the Mayo Clinic Cohort of Oophorectomy and Aging who were postmenopausal at the time of surgery, there was a significant increase in the risk of any osteoporotic fracture (moderate trauma fractures of the hip, spine, or distal forearm) as compared to expected rates (standardized incidence ratio [SIR] 1.54; 95% CI, 1.29–1.82), but almost as large an increase in fractures at other sites (SIR 1.35; 95% CI, 1.13–1.59) [60]. Likewise, women who were premenopausal at the time of surgery had an increased risk of distal forearm (SIR 1.4, 95% CI 1.0-2.0) and vertebral fractures (SIR 1.9, 95% CI 1.3-2.8), but not hip fracture (SRI 1.1, 95% CI 0.6-1.9) [25].

However, oophorectomy at time of hysterectomy was not found to be associated with hip fracture in either the Nurses’ Health Study or the Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study [21,23]. (See 'Studies regarding elective oophorectomy' above.)

CLINICAL DECISION-MAKING — The decision regarding elective oophorectomy at time of hysterectomy for benign indications is complex. The approach to such decisions must include comprehensive counseling regarding risks and benefits and shared decision-making between the clinician and patient.  

The first step is to determine whether the choice regarding oophorectomy is truly elective (see 'Indications for oophorectomy' above). All women planning hysterectomy should be assessed for risk factors for ovarian and breast cancer. In addition, an appropriate evaluation for extrauterine pelvic pathology should be performed. Strategies for cancer risk reduction in women at high risk of ovarian cancer due to hereditary ovarian and breast cancer syndromes are discussed separately. (See "Risk-reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy in women at high risk of epithelial ovarian and fallopian tubal cancer", section on 'Cancer risk reduction' and "Management of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome and patients with BRCA mutations".)

Bilateral oophorectomy is associated with a small absolute cancer risk reduction for women who are at an average risk of ovarian or breast cancer. Ovarian cancer is not a common disease and hysterectomy itself provides a small preventive effect. Some data suggest an association between oophorectomy and decreased risk of breast cancer in women who are younger than 45 years, but no decrease in breast cancer mortality has been found. (See 'Ovarian cancer risk reduction' above and 'Breast cancer risk reduction' above.).

There are conflicting data on long-term health effects of elective oophorectomy beyond ovarian and breast cancer risk reduction. The best available data are from observational studies, some of which conflict with each other. Given the current evidence, elective oophorectomy may be associated with an increase in long-term risks of all-cause mortality and cardiovascular disease, particularly in women who are younger than 45 to 54 years at the time of surgery (see 'All-cause mortality' above and 'Cardiovascular disease and stroke' above). Cognitive impairment, parkinsonism, psychiatric symptoms, sexual dysfunction, and osteoporosis are additional risks. (See 'Cognitive function and neurologic disease' above and 'Depression and anxiety' above and 'Sexual dysfunction' above and 'Osteoporosis' above.)

In the short-term, premenopausal women who undergo bilateral oophorectomy will experience the abrupt onset of menopause and will typically have bothersome menopausal symptoms (eg, hot flashes, sleep disturbance, and mood changes). These symptoms may be treated with postmenopausal estrogen therapy; significant risks of therapy have not been demonstrated in premenopausal women. Withholding estrogen therapy from young women who experience premature or early menopause due to oophorectomy, however, may, on the other hand, pose significant risks, based on the evidence presented here. (See "Postmenopausal hormone therapy: Benefits and risks".)

For women who have already experienced natural menopause, elective bilateral oophorectomy may be health neutral. Although, a decision analysis based upon a comprehensive review of observational data concluded that ovarian conservation at time of benign hysterectomy until age 65 years benefits long-term survival, and that the risks and benefits of elective oophorectomy approximate each other after age 65 years [61].

The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG) advises strong consideration of ovarian conservation at time of hysterectomy in premenopausal women who are not at an increased genetic risk of ovarian cancer [3]. They advise consideration of oophorectomy at time of hysterectomy in women who are postmenopausal or who have a condition that may benefit from oophorectomy (eg, endometriosis, pelvic inflammatory disease, chronic pelvic pain).  

Given, these considerations and the available data, for most women who undergo hysterectomy for benign indications, in the absence of ovarian pathology or a familial cancer syndrome, we suggest ovarian conservation. Oophorectomy is reasonable for women who place a higher priority on ovarian cancer prevention than on other long-term health risks, particularly those who are 51 years old or older.

The decision regarding salpingo-oophorectomy is more difficult for women who have some risk factors for ovarian cancer (table 2), but who do not have a hereditary cancer syndrome. Ovarian cancer risk assessment tools have been proposed, but are not well validated. As an example, one case control study found a 4 percent lifetime increased risk of ovarian cancer in women with five or more of the following risk factors: Jewish ethnicity, less than one year of oral contraceptive use, nulliparity, no breastfeeding, no tubal ligation, painful periods or endometriosis, polycystic ovarian syndrome or obesity, and talc use [62]. Counseling of such patients believed to be at intermediate risk of ovarian cancer must be individualized, and should include a full discussion of all of the advantages and disadvantages of the procedure. (See 'Ovarian cancer risk reduction' above.)

ESTROGEN THERAPY AFTER OOPHORECTOMY — Women experiencing premature or early menopause due to bilateral oophorectomy at the time of hysterectomy are different from women who reach menopause at the median age of 51 years, and data regarding the use of hormone therapy in naturally menopausal women should not be extrapolated to women who have surgical menopause at the time of hysterectomy [63,64]. The risks of hormone therapy use by women with induced premature or early menopause may be greater due to the addition of progestin with estrogen therapy, but the benefits potentially greater, although controlled clinical trial data are lacking [63]. Typically, estrogen therapy for these women is recommended until the average age of natural menopause, in an effort to provide cardiac, cognitive, and bone protection, along with maintaining healthy sexual function [64,65]. Observational data consistently indicate that several of the serious long-term health consequences of bilateral oophorectomy can be ameliorated by taking estrogen therapy until at least age 50 to 51 years [24,40,46].

Women who are treated with hormone therapy after hysterectomy may take estrogen therapy alone, since a progestogen for endometrial protection is not needed. Following bilateral oophorectomy, some clinicians treat women with androgen therapy for sexual dysfunction; other indications for androgens in this population are not well established and concern for increased risk of breast cancer and cardiovascular disease has been raised [66,67]. (See "Sexual dysfunction in women: Management", section on 'Androgens'.)

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

●Many women undergo oophorectomy at the time of hysterectomy. It has been common practice to counsel women who were planning hysterectomy for benign indications, and were in their mid-40s or older, to undergo concomitant bilateral oophorectomy. (See 'Introduction' above.)
●Elective oophorectomy refers to the removal of the ovaries in a woman who has no known indication for this procedure (eg, ovarian pathology, hereditary ovarian cancer syndrome). Risk-reducing oophorectomy refers to the removal of the ovaries in a woman at high risk of ovarian or breast cancer due to a known gene mutation. (See 'Terminology' above.)
●Oophorectomy is associated with a reduction in the risk of ovarian cancer. Some data suggest that breast cancer risk is probably reduced in women who are premenopausal at time of surgery. (See 'Ovarian cancer risk reduction' above and 'Breast cancer risk reduction' above.)
●Oophorectomy appears to increase long-term mortality and cardiovascular risk in women under the age of 45 to 50 years who do not take estrogen therapy. (See 'Long-term health risks' above.)
●Oophorectomy, particularly before menopause, has potential deleterious effects on the risk for cognitive decline, parkinsonism, depression and anxiety, sexual dysfunction and osteoporotic fractures. (See 'Cognitive function and neurologic disease' above and 'Depression and anxiety' above and 'Sexual dysfunction' above.)
●For most women who undergo hysterectomy for benign indications, in the absence of ovarian pathology or a familial cancer syndrome, we suggest ovarian conservation (Grade 2C). Oophorectomy is reasonable, particularly for those who are 51 years of age or older, for women who place a higher priority on ovarian cancer prevention than on the potential risks of mortality and cardiovascular disease that have been suggested by some studies. (See 'Clinical decision-making' above.)  
●Counseling of women with risk factors for ovarian cancer (table 2), but who do not have a hereditary cancer syndrome, must be individualized. (See 'Clinical decision-making' above.)
●Women who undergo oophorectomy inducing premature (before age 40 years) or early (before age 45 years) menopause are likely to benefit from estrogen therapy until they reach the average age of natural menopause. (See 'Estrogen therapy after oophorectomy' above and "Management of spontaneous primary ovarian insufficiency (premature ovarian failure)".)