Management of pediatric dyslipidemia
INTRODUCTION — Dyslipidemias are disorders of lipoprotein metabolism that may result in the following abnormalities:
●High total cholesterol (TC)
●High low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C)
●Low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C)
●High non-HDL-C
●High triglycerides (TG)
In adults, dyslipidemia, especially elevated LDL-C, is an established risk factor for cardiovascular disease (CVD), and correcting dyslipidemia reduces the risk of CVD. The effect of treatment rises as the risk of CVD increases, with the greatest benefit in adults with known coronary heart disease. (See "Treatment of lipids (including hypercholesterolemia) in primary prevention" and "Lipoprotein classification; metabolism; and role in atherosclerosis".)
Atherosclerosis begins in childhood and adolescence, and pediatric dyslipidemia contributes to early atherosclerosis and, by extension, to premature CVD [1]. Although there are limited pediatric outcome data, treatment of children with severe dyslipidemia due to homozygous hypercholesterolemia, who are at high risk for CVD during childhood, appears to reduce the risk of premature atherosclerosis. (See "Inherited disorders of LDL-cholesterol metabolism", section on 'Familial hypercholesterolemia'.)
Although long-term outcome data are not available for the general pediatric population, it is reasonable to assume based on evidence from adult studies and limited pediatric data that timely intervention to decrease and possibly eliminate dyslipidemia in children may decelerate the atherosclerotic process, which would prevent or delay the onset of CVD. As a result, identifying children with dyslipidemia and successfully improving their lipid profile may reduce their risk of accelerated atherosclerosis and premature CVD. In addition, population-based measures to promote healthy lifestyle, such as reducing dietary trans fat, may play an important role in reducing pediatric dyslipidemia. (See"Pediatric prevention of adult cardiovascular disease: Promoting a healthy lifestyle and identifying at-risk children", section on 'Promotion of healthy lifestyle'.)
The management of dyslipidemia in children will be reviewed here. The association between pediatric dyslipidemia and atherosclerosis, the definition of pediatric dyslipidemia, and screening to identify children with lipid disorders is discussed separately. (See "Definition and screening for dyslipidemia in children".)
RATIONALE FOR INTERVENTION — The rationale for initiating therapy to control lipid disorders in children and adolescents is based upon increasing evidence that pediatric dyslipidemia (particularly elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol [LDL-C]) contributes to premature atherosclerosis and the early development of cardiovascular disease (CVD) [1]. (See "Definition and screening for dyslipidemia in children", section on 'Association between pediatric dyslipidemia and atherosclerosis'.)
In addition, there are data in a select population of children with severe dyslipidemia that suggest treatment decelerates the atherosclerosis process as assessed by indirect measures.
●In a study of pediatric patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), patients treated with a low saturated fat diet and statin therapy had regression in carotid intima-mediated thickness (cIMT, an indirect measure of atherosclerosis), while control patients treated with a standard diet and placebo therapy demonstrated the expected progression of increased cIMT [2]. In a follow-up report, earlier initiation of statin therapy correlated with smaller increases in cIMT, suggesting that earlier intervention delayed progression of atherosclerosis [3].
●In another study of children with FH, statin therapy was associated with improved endothelial function (assessed by flow-mediated dilation [FMD], another indirect measurement of atherosclerosis) compared with patients who received placebo [4]. FMD measurements in statin-treated patients approached the level of normal control children without FH.
In children with FH, evidence from a systematic review of nine randomized placebo controlled trials has shown that the use of statin therapy is effective in reducing LDL-C levels and was not associated with significant adverse effects (ie, hepatic and muscular toxicity and effects on sexual development) [5]. Of note, however, these trials were not designed to detect very rare or long-term adverse effects. (See "Inherited disorders of LDL-cholesterol metabolism", section on 'Familial hypercholesterolemia'.)
No randomized clinical trials have demonstrated treating dyslipidemia in the general pediatric population reduces the risk of premature CVD. Several United States (US) major organizations (American Heart Association [AHA], American Academy of Pediatrics [AAP], and the National Cholesterol Education Program [NCEP]) and an expert panel sponsored by the US National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) concluded that intervention in children with significant dyslipidemia is warranted [1,6-9]. This approach is based on the premise that many of these children are likely to have FH, and the belief that the consequences of elevated LDL in non-FH patients are likely to contribute to accelerated atherosclerosis and CVD.
Because there is a lack of direct evidence linking drug treatment with a reduction in CVD, some question the risk-benefit of pharmacologic therapy in children with dyslipidemia [10]. (See 'Rationale and criteria for pharmacologic therapy' below.)
OVERVIEW — Treatment for dyslipidemia includes both nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic interventions. Management decisions are dependent upon the severity of dyslipidemia, and the presence of other cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk factors; lifestyle modification is nearly always the primary approach of therapy.
NONPHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY — Nonpharmacologic therapy, also referred to as lifestyle modification, includes dietary interventions, elimination of smoke exposure, and increased activity, which can improve lipid profiles. In most pediatric patients with dyslipidemia, a trial of lifestyle modification is implemented before pharmacologic therapy is considered.
An observational study that tracked blood lipid levels of children starting at age 9, 12, and 15 years through young adulthood demonstrated adult lipid levels were influenced by lifestyle choices [11]. As an example, weight control and exercise were associated with improved lipid levels in individuals with pediatric dyslipidemia. In contrast, increase in adiposity, and continuation or commencement of smoking from childhood to adulthood were associated with adult dyslipidemia.
Dietary modification — Dietary interventions can modestly improve abnormal lipid levels in healthy children and in those with dyslipidemia [1]. (See "Pediatric prevention of adult cardiovascular disease: Promoting a healthy lifestyle and identifying at-risk children", section on 'Nutrition'.)
Diet modifications are dependent on the underlying lipid disorder.
●Reduction of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) – Low saturated fat diet has been shown to modestly reduce LDL-C and total cholesterol. In addition, plant sterol or stanol esters may enhance LDL-C lowering effects in children with familial hypercholesterolemia.
●Reduction of triglycerides (TG) – Reduced intake of simple carbohydrates and weight loss can reduce TG levels. Omega-3 fatty acids supplementation or an increase in fish intake may also reduce TG levels.
Dietary counseling should be tailored to the patient and his/her family. Behavior modification and motivational interviewing techniques may be helpful. Support and lifestyle modification for the whole family is usually necessary for successful change in the child.
Hypercholesteremia — The primary dietary modification for children with elevated total cholesterol (TC) and LDL-C is reduced intake of total and saturated fat, and cholesterol. In addition, dietary supplements (eg, plant sterols and stanol esters) may also be effective.
Low saturated fat diet — Several American societies (ie, American Heart Association [AHA], American Academy of Pediatrics [AAP], and the National Cholesterol Education Program [NCEP]), and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) sponsored expert panel recommend that children with elevated LDL-C levels be placed on a diet that limits total and saturated fat, and cholesterol [1,7-9,12]. There is good evidence that a diet that limits the total fat intake to 30 percent of total calories, saturated fat to 7 to 10 percent of total calories, and dietary cholesterol to less than 300 mg/day reduces the levels of TC and LDL-C in healthy children. (See "Pediatric prevention of adult cardiovascular disease: Promoting a healthy lifestyle and identifying at-risk children", section on 'Nutrition'.)
A more restricted diet has been shown to effectively reduce LDL-C in children with dyslipidemia.
●In prepubertal children with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), a restricted diet for one year of total fat (23 ± 5 percent of total calories) and saturated fat (8 ± 2 percent of total calories), and cholesterol (67 ± 28 mg/1000 kcal) lowered TC and LDL-C levels by 4 and 5.5 percent; there was no statistically significant difference in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) or TG levels [13].
●In a study of prepubertal children (age range 8 to 10 years) with LDL-C levels between the 80th and 98th percentile for age and sex, children who were assigned to a restricted diet (total fat intake to 28 percent of total calories, saturated fat <8 percent of total calories, and total cholesterol to 75 mg/1000 kcal per day) had a larger reduction of LDL-C levels than standard care controls (15.4 versus 11.9 mg/dL [0.40 versus 0.31 mmol/L]) over a three-year period [14]. There were no statistically significant differences in TC, HDL-C, and TG levels between the two groups.
In 2011, an expert panel sponsored by the United States NHLBI reviewed the available data regarding the status of cardiovascular health and risk reduction in children and adolescents. Based on their review of the literature, the following staged dietary recommendations for pediatric patients with hypercholesteremia defined as a LDL-C >130mg/dL (3.4 mmol/L) were published [1]:
●If the child has not been on a low saturated fat diet designed for healthy children, the patient is placed on an initial diet that limits total fat intake to 30 percent of total calories, saturated fat to between 7 and 10 percent, and total cholesterol to 300 mg per day (table 1). Implementation should be guided by a registered dietician.
●If fasting lipid levels continue to exceed the therapeutic target after a three-month trial of the above initial diet, a more restricted diet that limits total fat to 25 to 30 percent of total calories, saturated fat to ≤7 percent of total calories, and cholesterol to <200 mg/dL is recommended (table 2).
In our practice, we generally place children on the less restrictive diet that limits total fat intake to 30 percent of total calories because adherence to the more restrictive diet is difficult and may foster noncompliance and stress between the child and parents. We emphasize the intake of “good” fats (mono and polyunsaturated fats) as a substitute for saturated and trans fats because of their beneficial effects on cardiovascular health.
In children with severe dyslipidemia (LDL-C >190 mg/dL [4.9 mmol/L]), diet modification alone is rarely sufficient to reach target levels for LDL-C. (See 'Rationale and criteria for pharmacologic therapy' below.)
Dietary supplements — Dietary supplementation with plant stanols and sterols appears to enhance a reduction in LDL-C in conjunction with a low saturated fat diet [1]. The benefit of other supplements (eg, fiber) to reduce LDL-C is less clear. The following is a summary of these supplements, which are discussed in greater detail separately. (See "Lipid lowering with diet or dietary supplements", section on 'Fiber' and "Lipid lowering with diet or dietary supplements", section on 'Plant sterols'.)
●Plant stanols and sterols – In adults, placement of these compounds in margarine, orange juice, yogurt drinks, cereal bars, and dietary supplements has been shown to reduce dietary cholesterol by 5 to 10 percent. One study in healthy children showed that a mean intake of 1.8 g/day of plant sterol contained in a margarine product reduced serum LDL-C by 8 percent [15]. In children with familial hypercholesterolemia, clinical trials have shown that both stanols and sterol esters decrease TC and LDL-C levels [16-18]. Although stanols and sterols reduce serum LDL levels, there are no data demonstrating they reduce the risk of atherosclerosis or early cardiovascular disease (CVD) [19,20]. Stanols and sterols decrease absorption of fat-soluble vitamins and beta-carotene. Children taking these supplements should take a daily multivitamin. (See "Lipid lowering with diet or dietary supplements", section on 'Plant sterols'.)
●Fiber – Data vary on whether increased fiber intake can reduce serum LDL-C [1,7]. Fiber is thought to bind with cholesterol within bile acids, thus removing it from the enterohepatic circulation. Supplemental fiber is usually required as a daily dose of 6 grams for children ages 2 to 12 years and 12 grams for children ages 12 years and older. In our practice, we prefer that children consume fiber from dietary sources (eg, fruit, vegetables, and whole grains) and generally do not recommend fiber supplements. (See "Lipid lowering with diet or dietary supplements", section on 'Fiber'.)
●Other supplements – Other supplements, such as garlic, are not effective. Red Yeast rice extract, as it contains monacolins that have statin-like activity, has been shown to lower cholesterol in adults. However, we do not recommend its use because the amount of monacolins a child would be exposed to is unknown and unregulated. (See "Lipid lowering with diet or dietary supplements", section on 'Red yeast rice'.)
Hypertriglyceridemia — In most patients, significant decreases in elevated TG will occur with weight loss, diet modification, and fish oil (omega-3 fatty acid) supplementation. However, a high TG by itself is not a major CVD risk factor.
●Significant decreases in TG and increases in LDL-C levels were observed with small amounts of weight loss in overweight/obese children and adolescents [21-24].
●Data in adults and several pediatric studies have shown that a reduction of simple carbohydrate intake, particularly in conjunction with weight loss, results in reduced TG levels [25,26]. (See "Approach to the patient with hypertriglyceridemia", section on 'Management'.)
●Data in adults have demonstrated dietary and supplemental fish oil containing omega-3 fatty acids lower serum TG levels (in particular, eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid). Similar data are lacking in children. (See "Lipid lowering with diet or dietary supplements", section on 'Fish oil and omega-3 fatty acids' and "Fish oil and marine omega-3 fatty acids", section on 'Effects on cardiovascular risk factors'.)
Based on the above data, the NHLBI sponsored panel recommended nonpharmacologic interventions for children with elevated TG include weight loss, and a reduction of simple carbohydrate intake (table 3) [1]. If the child is obese, weight reduction is particularly important so that interventions should focus on decreased caloric intake and increased daily activity. In addition, an increase in dietary fish is recommended, thereby increasing the intake of omega-3 fatty acids.
In our practice, we recommend a trial of omega-3 fatty acid supplementation (dose of 2 to 4 g per day) for patients with extremely elevated serum TG (600 to 1000 mg/dL).Omega-3 fatty acid is given in conjunction with fibrate therapy or as a substitute if fibrates are not tolerated. (See 'Fibric acid derivatives' below.)
Activity — Evidence in both adults and children demonstrates that daily vigorous activity and reduction in sedentary behavior are associated with lower risk of CVD and better fasting lipid profiles. It is unclear whether this is an independent association or whether it’s mediated by weight loss. Children with dyslipidemia should participate in at least as much daily physical activity as recommended for the general pediatric population (table 4). Physical activity and cardiovascular health in children and adults are discussed separately. (See "Pediatric prevention of adult cardiovascular disease: Promoting a healthy lifestyle and identifying at-risk children", section on 'Physical activity' and"Exercise and fitness in the prevention of cardiovascular disease".)
RATIONALE AND CRITERIA FOR PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY
Background — Clinical trials in adults with hypercholesterolemia demonstrate statin therapy lowers low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and reduces coronary artery disease. (See "Clinical trials of cholesterol lowering for primary prevention of coronary heart disease".)
Several clinical trials in children with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) including those with heterozygous FH show that statin therapy, compared with placebo, decreases serum LDL-C without significant adverse side effects over several years of follow-up [2-5,27-32]. Specifically, there was no adverse effect on growth, neurodevelopment, and sexual maturation [5]. The duration of follow-up has been insufficient to prove statin therapy during childhood lowers the risk of future cardiovascular disease (CVD). However, measures of preclinical atherosclerosis (eg, carotid intima-media thickness, flow-mediated dilation) suggest statin therapy slows the progression of subclinical atherosclerosis [2-4].
Studies of patients who have undergone cardiac transplantation also demonstrated that statin therapy was an effective and safe intervention [33,34]. In two studies, the use of statin therapy compared with no statin therapy reduced total cholesterol (TC) and decreased the incidences of cardiac transplant vasculopathy and mortality. In one study, no significant side effects of statin therapy were noted during the eight-year observation period [34].
Based upon the above findings, the use of statin therapy to treat children with significant dyslipidemia has been advocated by the American Heart Association (AHA), American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) expert panel [1,7,8].
Others point to the lack of evidence that long-term, perhaps life-long drug treatment in young children reduces premature CVD [10]. In one commentary, the authors point to the potential pitfalls of using lipid levels as a surrogate marker for CVD, since not all individuals with dyslipidemia go on to develop CVD events. In addition, given the known, albeit uncommon, adverse effects of statin, the primary drug class used to treat pediatric dyslipidemia, they suggest the short-term risk-benefit ratio is not favorable for the initiation of therapy, and the long-term risk-benefit ratio is unknown.
NHLBI expert panel criteria — In the 2011 NHLBI expert panel report, the following age-based recommendations for pharmacotherapy in children with dyslipidemia were based on review of the available literature [1]. These recommendations caution that when medication is prescribed, it needs to occur in the context of a complete assessment of the cardiovascular risk profile of the patient and in consultation with the patient and the family.
The decision to begin pharmacotherapy is based on the average results of two fasting lipid profiles that are obtained between two weeks and three months apart. (See"Definition and screening for dyslipidemia in children", section on 'Confirmation testing'.)
Children below 10 years of age — Pharmacotherapy should not be used in children less than 10 years of age unless they have a severe primary hyperlipidemia or a high-risk CVD condition [1]. These rare conditions are associated with serious morbidity and include homozygous FH (LDL-C levels >400 mg/dL [10.4 mmol/L]), severe heterozygous FH, and primary hypertriglyceridemia (triglycerides [TG] >500 mg/dL [5.6 mmol/L]). These patients should be referred to a pediatric lipid specialist.
Children 10 years of age or older — Pharmacotherapy of older children with significantly elevated LDL-C or TG is generally initiated when dietary measures fail to achieve target levels and additional CVD risk factors are present [1].
CVD risk factors and conditions — The age-based NHLBI recommendations are dependent on the presence and severity of CVD risks and conditions, defined as follows (algorithm 1) [1]:
●CVD risk factors
•High-level factors include hypertension requiring drug therapy (ie, blood pressure ≥99th percentile + 5 mmHg), current cigarette smoker, and body mass index (BMI) ≥97th percentile.
•Moderate-level factors include hypertension not requiring drug therapy, BMI ≥95th and <97th percentile, and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) <40 mg/dL(1 mmol/L).
●Conditions with an increased risk of CVD
•High-risk conditions include type 1 and 2 diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, heart transplant recipients, and Kawasaki disease with current coronary aneurysms.
•Moderate-risk conditions include Kawasaki disease with regressed coronary aneurysms, chronic inflammatory diseases (eg, systemic lupus erythematosus, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, and nephrotic syndrome.
Hypercholesteremia — Management decisions for hypercholesteremia are dependent on the level of LDL-C and the presence and severity of additional CVD risk factors. [1]. (See 'CVD risk factors and conditions' above.)
●Children with LDL-C >250 mg/dL (6.5 mmol/L) should be referred to a pediatric lipid specialist, as it is likely that they have a severe primary hyperlipidemia condition (eg, familial hypercholesteremia) or a high-risk CVD condition.
●Children with LDL-C between 130 and 250 mg/dL (3.4 and 6.5 mmol/L) are initially treated with a low saturated fat diet and increased daily activity (see'Nonpharmacologic therapy' above). After a six-month trial of lifestyle/diet management, pharmacotherapy is considered based on the persistently elevated LDL-C and the presence of CVD risk factors or condition as follows:
•LDL-C ≥190 mg/dL (4.9 mmol/L) without additional CVD risk factors.
•LDL-C ≥160 mg/dL (4.1 mmol/L) and <190 mg/dL (4.9 mmol/L) and one of the following conditions: (1) a family history of premature CVD (defined as a heart attack, treated angina, interventions for coronary artery disease, stroke, or sudden cardiac disease in a male parent, grandparent, uncle, or sibling before 55 years of age, or a female parent, grandparent, aunt, or sibling before 65 years of age), (2) one high-level CVD risk factor or condition, or (3) two moderate-level risk factors or conditions. If there are no risk factors, patients are maintained on a low saturated fat diet, and continued monitoring of lipid levels and onset of other CVD risk factors.
•LDL-C is ≥130 mg/dL (3.4 mmol/L) and <160 mg/dL (4.1 mmol/L) and two high-risk CVD factors or conditions, or one high-risk and two moderate-risk CVD factors or conditions.
If there are no additional risk factors, patients are maintained on a low saturated fat diet, and continued monitoring of lipid levels and onset of other CVD risk factors.
Based on the above criteria for treatment, less than one percent of adolescents in the United States would qualify for pharmacological treatment. Specifically National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data from 1999 to 2000 showed only 0.8 percent of the 7180 adolescents between 12 and 17 years of age met the AAP criteria for pharmacologic therapy [35]. Of these 26 patients, 11 had LDL-C greater than 190 mg/dL, and the remaining 15 had LDL-C greater than 160 mg/dL and at least one risk factor (obesity, diabetes, hypertension, cigarette smoking, and a positive family history). Overall, 6.6 percent of the group had elevated LDL-C levels (defined as >130 mg/dL),and 9.6 had elevated total cholesterol (defined as >200 mg/dL). The low number of children eligible for treatment based on the AAP guidelines is intentional, and is related to the lack of long-term efficacy and safety data. Nevertheless, it is estimated that 100,000 children in the United States would qualify for statin therapy based on these criteria.
Similar results were noted from an analysis of NHANES data from 1999 to 2010 using screening and treatment criteria from the NHLBI expert panel that reported 0.85 percent of children in the United States between 12 and 17 years of age would meet criteria for statin therapy [36]. Obese children were more likely to be recommended for statin therapy than nonobese children (3.1 versus 0.6 percent).This finding is in part because the NHLBI guidelines include additional risk factors to elevated body mass index associated with obesity, such as diabetes mellitus and elevated blood pressure, in determining when therapy should be initiated.
These two studies used similar LDL-C cut points, but differ on determining the contribution of additional risk factors. Nevertheless, the results were consistent, demonstrating that less than 1 percent of adolescents in the United States would meet criteria for statin therapy.
Hypertriglyceridemia — Pharmacotherapeutic options for children with elevated triglycerides are limited, and the main intervention remains diet modification including increased intake of fish or the use of fish oil, and weight loss [1]. (See 'Hypertriglyceridemia' above.)
Drug therapy includes fibrate or niacin. However, these agents are primarily used in children with primary hypertriglyceridemia who typically have an average TG >500 mg/dL(5.6 mmol/L) or a single TG level >1000 mg/dL (11.3 mmol/L). These patients should be referred to a pediatric lipid specialist. (See 'Fibric acid derivatives' below and 'Other agents' below.)
In addition, in consultation with a pediatric lipid specialist, drug therapy may be considered in children with TG between 200 mg/dL (2.2 mmol/L) and 499 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L),and a non-HDL-C ≥145 mg/dL after a trial of nonpharmacologic intervention.
PHARMACOLOGIC AGENTS — Lipid-altering agents encompass several classes of drugs that include statins, fibric acid derivatives, bile acid sequestrants, nicotinic acid, and cholesterol absorption inhibitors (eg, ezetimibe). These drugs differ with respect to mechanism of action and to the degree and type of lipid lowering.
The following sections review the use of these drugs in children with dyslipidemia (table 5). Discussions of these drugs in the management of adults with hypercholesterolemia are found separately. (See "Treatment of lipids (including hypercholesterolemia) in primary prevention" and "Treatment of lipids (including hypercholesterolemia) in secondary prevention".)
Statins — Statins are the most common cardiovascular disease (CVD) drugs used in the treatment of hypercholesterolemia in adults, and are the only class of drugs to demonstrate improvements in CVD morbidity and mortality. As noted above, clinical trials in children with familial hypercholesterolemia have shown a consistent significant reduction of serum low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) with the use of statins. (See "Treatment of lipids (including hypercholesterolemia) in primary prevention".)
Several different formulations of statin therapy are available. Currently lovastatin, simvastatin, pravastatin, rosuvastatin, and atorvastatin are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in children (table 5). Pravastatin, atorvastatin, simvastatin, and lovastatin are available in generic forms.
When considering initiation of statin therapy, one needs to balance the extent of risk reduction of CVD against the risk of potential adverse effects from the drug itself [10,37,38]. In adults between 45 and 60 years of life, six-year clinical outcome data showed statin therapy to be effective in reducing the absolute risk of nonfatal congenital heart disease (CHD) events and CVD death by 3 percent (from 9.4 to 6.4 percent). Data from adult studies also demonstrate a low risk of adverse side effects that include myopathy, new-onset type 2 diabetes mellitus, and perhaps hepatic dysfunction. (See "Clinical trials of cholesterol lowering for primary prevention of coronary heart disease"and "Overview of primary prevention of coronary heart disease and stroke" and "Statins: Actions, side effects, and administration", section on 'Side effects'.)
Similar long-term data regarding outcome are not available in children, who are at a much lower short-term risk for cardiovascular events and may require therapy for several decades to achieve an absolute reduction in cardiovascular mortality and morbidity. In addition, although long-term data have suggested a safe profile for statins, the long-term safety of statin therapy initiated in childhood is unknown [10,39]. Bile acid sequestrants may be considered an alternate option for patients in whom there is a preference for avoiding a statin. Ultimately, management decisions must be individualized to the patient's specific circumstances [37]. (See 'Management approach' below and "Clinical trials of cholesterol lowering for primary prevention of coronary heart disease" and "Overview of primary prevention of coronary heart disease and stroke".)
Statin therapy regimen — In our practice, when statin therapy is initiated, we follow the regimen outlined by the American Heart Association (AHA) and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) expert panel [1,9].
●Treatment is initiated at the lowest dose, which is given once a day, usually at bedtime, because most LDL-C synthesis occurs during nighttime hours.
●Adolescent females should be counseled about the possibility of drug teratogenicity and appropriate contraceptive methods while receiving statin therapy. Providers should be aware that oral contraceptive pills can increase lipid levels. In addition, use of statins by breastfeeding mothers is discouraged. (See "Statins: Actions, side effects, and administration", section on 'Risks in pregnancy and breastfeeding' and 'Other agents' below.)
●Initial choice of agent is generally based on price, the renal function of the child, potential drug interactions, and patient preference. In children, the lowest dose is initially used and, if needed, increased to meet the goals of therapy. In contrast, in adults a moderate dose is typically recommended based on targeting a LDL-C goal. (See"Treatment of lipids (including hypercholesterolemia) in primary prevention", section on 'Use of statins'.)
●Baseline laboratory evaluations include lipid profile, and measurements of serum creatinine kinase (CK), alanine aminotransferase, and aspartate aminotransferase. These tests are repeated four and eight weeks after the initiation of statin therapy to determine the efficacy of the treatment and whether there are any adverse effects. They are repeated every six months in patients on stable therapy. The testing of liver function tests and CK in asymptomatic patients is controversial, and many clinicians (particularly those who care for adult patients) believe this is unnecessary.
●Our targeted treatment values of LDL-C depend on the presence of associated risk factors and are generally as follows:
•Minimal value, less than 130 mg/dL (3.35 mmol/L)
•Optimal value, less than 110 mg/dL (2.85 mmol/L)
•Some providers target values of less than 100 mg/dL (2.59 mmol/L) for extremely high-risk patients, such as those with diabetes mellitus or chronic renal insufficiency.
●If the targeted value is met and there are no laboratory abnormalities, therapy is continued at the same dose. Reassessment is performed after four and eight weeks of therapy to confirm dosing, every three to four months during the first year, and then every six months thereafter.
Once a dosing regimen has been established, ongoing monitoring of growth, fasting lipoprotein profile, and laboratory evaluation for toxicity should be performed at each visit.
●If the targeted value is not met, the dose (usually by an increment of 10 to 20 mg) is increased. Reassessment is performed in four weeks including repeat laboratory evaluation. If treatment is well tolerated but goals are not yet met, one of the following options are followed:
•Dose of statin may be increased until the target or the maximum dose is reached or there is evidence of toxicity. Laboratory testing is reassessed again four and eight weeks after each dose change.
The US Food and Drug Administration has placed a black box label on simvastatin at a dose of 80 mg per day because it is associated with muscle toxicity in adults. If a daily dose of 40 mg of simvastatin is insufficient to achieve LDL-C control, a change to a more potent statin (eg, atorvastatin or rosuvastatin) is suggested. Doses of simvastatin that exceed 40 mg per day should be given under the supervision of a pediatric lipid specialist. (See "Statin myopathy", section on 'Statin characteristics'.)
•Another drug (eg, bile acid sequestrant or cholesterol absorption inhibitor) may be added to statin therapy under the direction of a pediatric lipid specialist. (See'Other agents' below.)
●If there are laboratory abnormalities, the drug may be stopped and the laboratory testing repeated in two weeks. When the abnormalities resolve, the drug may be restarted with close monitoring. For patients with adverse symptoms possibly related to the drug, it is most helpful to obtain laboratory testing while the symptoms are ongoing. This can help the practitioner to decipher if they are in fact drug-related.
●Children and adolescents generally are not treated with more than one class of lipid-lowering agents because of the increased risk of side effects, particularly muscle toxicity. Side effects of statins are also more commonly seen in patients on additional medications, such as cyclosporine, and drug interactions should be reviewed. Statins should be used with caution in patients with renal insufficiency, and doses should be lower when used in these circumstances.
●Patients who fail to achieve targeted values of LDL-C despite pharmacologic therapy are likely to have familial hypercholesterolemias (FH). These patients should be referred to a specialist with expertise in managing pediatric dyslipidemia, especially patients with FH, as other interventions may be warranted. (See "Inherited disorders of LDL-cholesterol metabolism", section on 'Familial hypercholesterolemia' and "Treatment of drug-resistant hypercholesterolemia", section on 'Referral to a specialist'.)
Fibric acid derivatives — Fibric acid derivatives raise high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) and lower triglycerides (TG). Although data are limited on the use of fibric acid derivatives in children [40], they may be useful in children with significantly elevated TG at risk for pancreatitis [1]. In one report from a tertiary center that reviewed its management of 76 children with hypertriglyceridemia (53 patients with primary and 13 with adiposity-related hypertriglyceridemia), triglyceride levels decreased with the use of fibrates, did not change with the use of statins, and increased with the use of bile acid-binding resins [41].
In our experience fibric acid derivatives have been well tolerated if given as monotherapy (eg, not combined with a statin). Generally, fibric acid medications are reserved for the rare child with severe triglyceride elevations (considered at levels >600 to 1000 mg/dL, usually prescribed for levels >1000 mg/dL) and are most often used in older adolescents. The risk of myopathy and rhabdomyolysis is increased when they are used in conjunction with statins or in patients with renal insufficiency. The simultaneous use of both statin and fibrate is rare in childhood, and they should be administered under the supervision of a pediatric lipid specialist.
Other agents
●Bile acid sequestrants are not as effective as statins and have adverse side effects that result in poor compliance (eg, constipation and bloating). For these reasons, bile acid sequestrants are used relatively infrequently. However, they may be useful in combination with a statin for patients who fail to meet target LDL-C levels [42]. The sequestrants are extremely safe, as they are not absorbed systemically, but remain in the gut and are excreted along with the bile containing cholesterol. For prepubertal patients with severe LDL-C elevations (heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia) who are able to be very compliant and do not experience bloating or constipation, the sequestrants can effectively lower LDL-C as much as 10 to 20 percent. They can be used until puberty, at which time statin therapy can be initiated. (See "Lipid lowering with drugs other than statins and fibrates", section on 'Bile acid sequestrants'.)
●Cholesterol absorption inhibitors (eg, ezetimibe) are lipid-lowering agents that prevent intestinal absorption of cholesterol and plant sterols. In adults, in combination with statins, ezetimibe further lowers serum LDL, but may not further lower CVD risk. Data are limited on the use of these agents in children. In one observational study, ezetimibe therapy (10 mg per day) was associated with a decrease in total cholesterol (TC) and LDL-C in children suspected of having familial hypercholesterolemia or familial combined hyperlipidemia, who failed to adequately respond to diet therapy or developed adverse effects with statin therapy [43]. In a small clinical trial of adolescent patients with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), the combination administration of ezetimibe and a statin resulted in greater reductions of LDL-C levels than did treatment with a statin alone [44]. However, it remains unclear whether the addition of ezetimibe is warranted as there are concerns about its efficacy and safety. As a result, this agent should only be used under the direction of pediatric lipid specialist. (See "Lipid lowering with drugs other than statins and fibrates", section on 'Ezetimibe'.)
●Niacin is particularly effective in raising HDL cholesterol, increasing levels by 20 to 30 percent [45]. However, compliance is difficult due to frequent side effects (eg, rash, flushing, and headaches). As a result, niacin is rarely used. Niacin comes in several different formulations, including various over the counter preparations, so care should be taken with dosing. The prescription formulation is the most convenient for use. (See "Lipid lowering with drugs other than statins and fibrates", section on 'Nicotinic acid (Niacin)'.)
MANAGEMENT APPROACH
Pediatric versus adult management — The decision of when to initiate lipid lowering pharmacotherapy in pediatric and adolescent patients is based on global cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk assessment. This approach differs from the adult primary prevention approach that calculates the individual patient risk reduction with pharmacotherapy. (See "Treatment of lipids (including hypercholesterolemia) in primary prevention", section on 'Deciding whom to treat'.)
●Adult primary prevention treatment recommendations are based on calculating the effect of statin on a patient’s baseline risk for CVD by using either the validated Framingham or the Reynolds risk scores, which were developed from robust outcome data. In contrast, an outcomes-based scoring system is not currently feasible in children because of the lack of available pertinent data. (See "Estimation of cardiovascular risk in an individual patient without known cardiovascular disease", section on 'Framingham risk score (1998)' and "Estimation of cardiovascular risk in an individual patient without known cardiovascular disease", section on 'Reynolds CVD risk score for men (2008)'.)
●Because of the lack of data to determine an individual child’s risk for CVD, a global CVD risk approach for children is recommended by the American Heart Association (AHA), American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) expert panel because of the lack of data to determine an individual child’s risk. This approach is based on low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and triglycerides (TG) levels, and incorporates other CVD risk factors and conditions that are associated with a high and moderate risk for CVD [7,46]. (See 'NHLBI expert panel criteria' above.)
●Another key difference between the pediatric and adult primary prevention approach is that the adult assessment is based on a 10-year risk, while pediatric guidelines consider an individual’s lifetime risk [47]. This point was underscored in the Third Report of the Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults, which stated “Most young adults with very high LDL-cholesterol levels (≥190 mg/dL) are candidates for cholesterol-lowering drugs, even when they are otherwise at low risk with 0-1 risk factor and 10-year risk <10 percent. Although their 10-year risk may not be high, long-term risk will be high enough to justify a more aggressive approach to LDL lowering” [48]. This is because these individuals likely have familial hypercholesterolemia, and therefore are not appropriate candidates for the Framingham risk score.
●Finally, it should be noted that the primary care adult approach for treatment should not be used for patients who have familial hypercholesterolemias (FH) [48,49], which is the most common cause of elevated LDL-C in childhood and adolescence. Patients with FH are at high risk for early atherosclerosis. Statin therapy should be initiated in all patients with homozygous FH because they are at high risk for CVD events in the first and second decades of life. Adjunct therapy (eg, LDL-C apheresis) is also generally necessary in the management of these patients. Adult risk assessment scores, which were developed based on the CVD risk in a general population should not be used in individuals with heterozygous FH who have a lifetime risk for CVD events that is not adequately captured by these scores. In contrast, the pediatric approach identifies and appropriately begins pharmacotherapy in children and young adolescents with FH. (See "Inherited disorders of LDL-cholesterol metabolism", section on 'Familial hypercholesterolemia'.)
The differences in these two approaches may result in a discrepancy of recommendations regarding statin therapy as older adolescents transition their care from pediatric to adult primary care clinicians. As an example, statin therapy may be initiated in an adolescent without any other risk factors based on a LDL-C level greater than 190 mg/dL,whereas such treatment would not be recommended based on a risk reduction assessment when the same patient reaches young adulthood. This inconsistency is due to differences in expert opinions of panel members for pediatric and adult consensus statements and guidelines, and possibly because FH is less clearly identified in young adults. (See "Treatment of lipids (including hypercholesterolemia) in primary prevention", section on 'Deciding whom to treat'.)
Our approach — Given the currently available evidence, we follow the approach outlined in the 2011 NHLBI expert panel guideline, the 2008 AAP guideline, and the 2006 AHA statement using global assessment of the child's risk for premature CVD and initiation of pharmacotherapy [1,7,9]. If and when there are more robust pediatric outcome data, pediatric individual risk assessment and treatment recommendations may become available, which would narrow some of the differences between the pediatric and adult approaches to primary CVD prevention.
As is the case with all medications used in pediatric patients with no long-term safety data, we exercise caution and initiate statins only when the likelihood of benefit of treating outweighs (admittedly unknown) risks of long-term medication use.
For the vast majority of children, the main focus of management to prevent or slow the progression of atherosclerosis is lifestyle modification. Nonpharmacologic therapy promoting healthy lifestyle changes is provided to all patients. This includes a diet high in fruits and vegetables, and an exercise regimen of daily vigorous activity (table 1). For children with high LDL-C, we recommend a low saturated-fat, low/no trans fat, low cholesterol diet. For children who are 12 months and older with high LDL or high-risk family history, we also recommend low fat dairy products. (See 'Dietary modification' above and 'Activity' above.)
If lifestyle counseling fails to reach the targeted goal by six months in children who are 10 years or older, we consider statin therapy. The decision to start pharmacologic therapy is based upon the severity of the child's dyslipidemia, the presence of other comorbid conditions (eg, diabetes or chronic kidney disease), the severity of family history of premature CVD (eg, homozygous FH), and the preferences of the child and family. The potential benefit of reduced CVD risk versus the unknown risk of long-term statin therapy is discussed with the family.
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
●Evidence from pediatric autopsy studies and data using indirect measures of atherosclerosis demonstrate an association between lipid disorders in children and the early onset of atherosclerosis. (See "Definition and screening for dyslipidemia in children", section on 'Association between pediatric dyslipidemia and atherosclerosis'.)
●Management of pediatric dyslipidemia is based on the rationale that early identification and control of pediatric dyslipidemia will reduce the risk and severity of premature cardiovascular disease (CVD) in adulthood. (See 'Rationale for intervention' above.)
●Treatment for dyslipidemia includes both nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic interventions. Management decisions are dependent upon the severity of dyslipidemia and the presence of other CVD risk factors.
●Nonpharmacologic therapy, also referred to as lifestyle modification, includes dietary interventions, elimination of cigarette smoke exposure, and increased activity. (See'Nonpharmacologic therapy' above.)
●Dietary interventions can modestly improve abnormal lipid levels in children with dyslipidemia (table 1).
•In children with hypercholesterolemia, diets that are more restrictive in the amount of total and saturated fat intake and cholesterol are recommended (table 2).
•In children with elevated triglycerides (TG), reduced intake of simple carbohydrates, increased intake of healthy fats, and weight loss are generally effective in lowering TG levels (table 3). (See 'Dietary modification' above.)
●Based on good evidence from adult studies and limited data from children at high risk for atherosclerosis and premature CVD, several United States organizations (American Academy of Pediatrics, American Heart Association, and an expert panel sponsored by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute [NHLBI]) have advocated the initiation of pharmacologic therapy for children ≥10 years of age with significant dyslipidemia that is refractory to nonpharmacologic intervention. The decision to initiate drug therapy is based on the severity of dyslipidemia and the presence of other high- and moderate-risk cardiovascular disease factors or conditions. (See'Rationale and criteria for pharmacologic therapy' above.)
●However, an alternative perspective points to the lack of evidence that long-term (perhaps life-long) drug therapy reduces CVD, and suggests given the known adverse effects of statins, the drugs primarily used to treat pediatric dyslipidemia, short-term risk-benefit is not favorable for the initiation of therapy. (See 'Rationale and criteria for pharmacologic therapy' above.)
●We suggest initiation of statin pharmacotherapy based on persistently elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and/or the presence of CVD risk factors or condition despite a trial of lifestyle modifications (Grade 2B). Our approach is consistent with the 2011 NHLBI guidelines and is as follows (see 'NHLBI expert panel criteria' above and 'Our approach' above):
•LDL-C ≥190 mg/dL (4.9 mmol/L) without additional CVD risk factors.
•LDL-C ≥160 mg/dL (4.1 mmol/L) and <190 mg/dL (4.9 mmol/L) and one of the following conditions: (1) a family history of premature CVD (defined as a heart attack, treated angina, interventions for coronary artery disease, stroke, or sudden cardiac disease in a male parent, grandparent, uncle, or sibling before 55 years of age, or a female parent, grandparent, aunt, or sibling before 65 years of age), (2) one high-level CVD risk factor or condition, or (3) two moderate-level risk factors or conditions. (See 'CVD risk factors and conditions' above.)
•LDL-C is ≥130 mg/dL (3.4 mmol/L) and <160 mg/dL (4.1 mmol/L) and two high-risk CVD factors or conditions, or one high-risk and two moderate-risk CVD factors or conditions.
•Children with extremely high LDL levels consistent with homozygous or compound heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), or with multiple high-risk conditions may be treated at early ages to lower LDL levels, if possible, based on the judgment of a pediatric lipid specialist.
●In children treated with statin therapy, we suggest that laboratory tests are checked at baseline and then one and two months after dose changes. We recommend patients on stable statin doses obtain lipid values and laboratory monitoring for side effects every six months. (See 'Statin therapy regimen' above.)
