Unipolar minor depression in adults: Management and treatment
INTRODUCTION — The continuum of clinical depression increases in severity from subsyndromal symptoms to the syndromes of minor depression and major depression [1-3]. Minor depression is characterized by fewer symptoms than major depression, as well as shorter episodes, less comorbidity, less psychosocial and physical impairment, and fewer recurrences [1,2,4].

Nevertheless, minor depression is a common syndrome that causes clinically significant distress and impairs functioning [5-9]. In addition, minor depression is associated with somatic symptoms [6,10], comorbid psychiatric and general medical disorders [6,10], and substantial healthcare utilization and costs [1,10,11]. Most patients with minor depression do not seek treatment from a mental health clinician, but are frequently seen in primary care [5,12]. Although minor depression is at least as prevalent as major depression, fewer patients with minor depression are accurately diagnosed by primary care clinicians [6,13].

This topic reviews the management and treatment of minor depression. The epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, assessment, and diagnosis of minor depression are discussed separately, as are the clinical features, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of major depression:

●(See "Unipolar minor depression in adults: Epidemiology, clinical presentation, and diagnosis".)
●(See "Unipolar depression in adults: Assessment and diagnosis".)
●(See "Unipolar major depression in adults: Choosing initial treatment".)
●(See "Unipolar depression in adults: Treatment of resistant depression".)
●(See "Unipolar depression in adults: Course of illness".)
TERMINOLOGY — The term “depression” can refer to a mood state, syndrome, or specific disorder; these depressive clinical states are discussed separately. (See "Unipolar depression in adults: Assessment and diagnosis", section on 'Definitions of depression'.)

Many terms are used to describe clinically significant depressive syndromes that fall short of meeting criteria for major depression, including [12,14,15]:

●Minor depression
●Mild depression
●Subthreshold depression
●Subsyndromal depression
●Subclinical depression
●Depressive symptoms
●Other specified depressive disorder
The definition of minor depression varies among different studies [12]. In the most widely used definitions, the number of concurrent symptoms ranges from one to three [1,16] or two to four [2,7], the symptoms cause clinically significant distress or psychosocial impairment, and the minimum duration of the syndrome is two to four weeks [12,17,18]. The diagnosis of minor depression is discussed separately. (See "Unipolar minor depression in adults: Epidemiology, clinical presentation, and diagnosis", section on 'Diagnosis'.)

GENERAL PRINCIPLES — Most minor depressive episodes are treated by internists and primary care clinicians [19], often times in conjunction with counsellors. However, referral to a psychiatrist should be considered for moderate to severe episodes that are unresponsive to multiple (eg, two to three) treatment trials. In addition, referral is often indicated for suicidal patients.

Treatment options for minor depression include watchful waiting, psychotherapy, and pharmacotherapy [20]. However, the benefits of these interventions are often modest [17,21,22].

In addition, treatments that are effective for unipolar major depression are not necessarily beneficial for minor depression. One example is collaborative (integrated) care, which integrates psychiatric treatment into primary care settings. Collaborative care is administered by a team that generally includes a primary care clinician and mental health specialist; the team provides pharmacotherapy and education about depression and teaches behavioral skills for managing it. Randomized trials have found that for major depression, collaborative care is superior to usual care (typically pharmacotherapy), but that minor depression responds equally well to usual care and collaborative care [23,24].

Minor depression may progress to major depression. The treatment of unipolar major depression is discussed separately, as is the course of illness in minor depression. (See "Unipolar major depression in adults: Choosing initial treatment" and "Unipolar minor depression in adults: Epidemiology, clinical presentation, and diagnosis", section on 'Course of illness'.)

Measurement based care — We suggest routine monitoring with rating scales during treatment of minor depression. Although there is no evidence demonstrating that this practice improves outcomes, possible benefits include identifying nonresponders, detecting residual or prodromal symptoms, and helping patients recognize improvement. Additional information about measurement based care is discussed separately. (See "Using scales to monitor symptoms and treat depression (measurement based care)".)

MILD ILLNESS — Mild episodes of minor depression are characterized by the absence of suicidal ideation or behavior, and little to no functional impairment.

For patients with minor depression who are mildly ill, we suggest watchful waiting, during which the patient is monitored every two to six weeks to ensure that symptoms are not worsening and a major depressive episode has not ensued [25]. In addition, it is helpful to educate patients about depression, including the connections between stress, depressive symptoms, and physical symptoms such as abdominal discomfort, fatigue, or headache. However, initiating treatment is a reasonable alternative to watchful waiting. In addition, if symptoms worsen during watchful waiting, such that the minor depressive episode becomes moderate to severe, patients should be treated with active interventions, which are discussed elsewhere in this topic. (See 'Moderate to severe illness' below.)

Evidence for the safety of watchful waiting in minor depression (as well as the lack of efficacy of pharmacotherapy) includes the following:

●A meta-analysis of six randomized trials compared antidepressants (amitriptyline, fluoxetine, isocarboxazid, or paroxetine) with placebo in 468 patients who were treated for 6 to 12 weeks [21]. The number of patients who responded (ie, improved 50 percent or more from baseline) to antidepressants or placebo was comparable (41 and 38 percent; relative risk 0.9, 95% CI 0.8-1.1); there was little to no heterogeneity across studies.
●A 12 week, open label randomized trial compared usual care alone with usual care plus paroxetine (20 to 40 mg per day) in 181 patients with either minor depression or mild episodes of major depression [26]. Usual care included four visits (each lasting about 15 minutes) with the primary care clinician, who assessed depressive symptoms and psychosocial functioning, provided support and advice, and educated patients about depression and coping skills (eg, exercising, maintaining social activities, and setting achievable goals). At the end of treatment and at the 52 week follow-up, improvement of depression was comparable for the two groups.
Other studies also support watchful waiting for minor depression. A randomized trial in 226 patients with minor depression included a four week, placebo lead-in phase prior to assigning patients to treatment [18,27]. At the end of the lead-in phase, depressive symptoms and psychosocial functioning were improved compared with baseline, and remission had occurred in 6 percent; remitted patients tended to be the least severely ill at baseline. Comparable results were found in a second trial (n = 111 patients), which included a one month period of watchful waiting prior to random assignment of treatment [22]. At the end of watchful waiting, depressive symptoms were improved compared with baseline, and remission had occurred in 11 percent. Improvement was associated with regularly engaging in pleasant activities (behavioral activation).

MODERATE TO SEVERE ILLNESS — Moderate to severe episodes of minor depression are characterized by the presence of:

●Suicidal ideation or behavior, and/or
●Moderate to severe functional impairment
First line — For patients with minor depression who are moderately to severely ill, we suggest psychotherapy as first line treatment, based upon randomized trials. We generally use cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) because it is the most widely studied option and is frequently more available. However, reasonable alternatives include interpersonal psychotherapy and problem solving therapy. Each of these three therapies is typically administered over a period of two to four months according to a manual, either within an individual or group format. The nature of each therapy is as follows:

●CBT – CBT combines cognitive therapy and behavioral therapy. Cognitive therapy attempts to modify the dysfunctional thoughts, beliefs, and attitudes (eg, “I’m no good,” “there’s nothing I can do,” or “my situation is hopeless”) that maintain behaviors associated with depression. Behavioral therapy focuses upon modifying the patient’s problematic behavioral responses (eg, social isolation and inactivity) to environmental stimuli or dysfunctional thoughts.
●Problem solving therapy – Problem solving therapy incorporates some CBT strategies and is based upon the principle that depression is connected to social problems. One goal of therapy is to develop rational and effective problem solving skills (positive problem orientation). Patients endeavor to identify and define their problems, and for each problem, consider the barriers to its resolution, set an achievable goal, list and evaluate the advantages and disadvantages for all available solutions (brainstorming), choose one option, develop an action plan and implement it, and evaluate the outcome [28].
●Interpersonal therapy – Interpersonal therapy addresses problematic interpersonal relationships or circumstances that are directly related to the current depressive episode. The therapy focuses upon four types of problems: grief over loss (eg, death of a spouse), role disputes (eg, conflicts at work or home about expectations from the relationship), role transitions (eg, childbirth, divorce, or retirement), and interpersonal skill deficits (pervasive problems starting and maintaining relationships, and chronically impoverished, contentious, and unfulfilling relationships). Interpersonal psychotherapy is discussed separately. (See "Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT) for depressed adults: Indications, theoretical foundation, general concepts, and efficacy" and "Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT) for depressed adults: Specific interventions and techniques".)
An overview of psychotherapy is presented elsewhere. (See "Overview of psychotherapies".)

Evidence that psychotherapy, particularly CBT, improves minor depression includes the following studies:

●A meta-analysis of seven randomized trials (700 patients) compared psychotherapy with treatment as usual or a waiting list [29]. CBT was used in five trials and interpersonal psychotherapy and problem solving therapy in one trial each. Improvement at the end of treatment was superior with psychotherapy than the control condition, and the difference was clinically small to moderate; there was little to no heterogeneity across studies. At the one year follow-up, there was a trend for a greater reduction of symptoms among patients who received psychotherapy.
●An eight-week randomized trial compared CBT with usual care (a 40 minute videotape discussing depression) in 49 primary care patients [30]. After eight weeks, depressive symptoms decreased more in patients who received CBT, and this advantage persisted at the one year follow-up.
●A randomized trial compared eight sessions of CBT (administered by telephone) plus usual care (a stress reduction program and treatment from other clinicians if desired) with usual care alone in 118 patients [31]. At the end of treatment (assessment after four months), improvement was greater in patients who received CBT, and the clinical difference between CBT and the control condition was moderate to large.
Studies of problem solving therapy that was adapted for primary care have yielded mixed results. A nine-week randomized trial compared problem solving therapy with usual care in 141 patients, and found that improvement was greater with active treatment [28]. Conversely, an 11-week randomized trial that compared problem solving therapy with pill placebo in 161 patients found that improvement was comparable for the two groups [17].

For patients with minor depression, psychotherapy may diminish somatization as part of symptomatic improvement. Somatization is a syndrome of nonspecific physical symptoms that cannot be fully explained by a known general medical condition after appropriate investigation. Evidence that psychotherapy can ameliorate somatization includes an eight-week randomized trial (n = 49) that compared CBT with usual care alone [30]. At the end of treatment, somatic symptoms decreased more in patients who received CBT, and this benefit persisted at the one year follow-up. Somatization is discussed separately. (See "Somatization: Epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, medical evaluation, and diagnosis" and "Somatization: Treatment and prognosis".)

In addition, psychotherapy may possibly prevent minor depression from progressing to major depression [32]:

●A meta-analysis of four randomized trials (533 patients with minor depression) compared CBT with treatment as usual, and found that at the one year follow-up, there was a trend for a lower incidence of major depression in patients treated with psychotherapy (incident rate ratio 0.70, 95% CI 0.47-1.03) [29].
●A subsequent, six-week randomized trial compared CBT with a control condition (a brochure with information that described depression and local treatment options) in 173 high school students with depressive symptoms [33]. At the two year follow-up, major depression occurred in fewer adolescents who received CBT than the control condition (14 versus 23 percent).
No head to head trials have compared CBT (or other forms of psychotherapy) with pharmacotherapy for minor depression. Indirect evidence suggests, however, that CBT is superior. Whereas several randomized trials indicate that CBT is efficacious [29-31], other randomized trials indicate that medication monotherapy is not [21,26,34]. (See 'Mild illness' above and 'Medication monotherapy' below.)

Second line

Psychotherapy plus pharmacotherapy — Moderate to severe episodes of minor depression often are not responsive to psychotherapy within four to eight sessions. Based upon clinical experience, we generally add an antidepressant such as a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) or serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor for these resistant patients. This approach is consistent with practice guidelines from the United Kingdom National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence [35,36]. Although no high quality studies have evaluated the combination of psychotherapy and an antidepressant for minor depression, randomized trials indicate that combination treatment is beneficial for major depression. (See "Unipolar major depression in adults: Choosing initial treatment", section on 'Antidepressants plus psychotherapy'.)

Choosing an antidepressant is discussed separately. (See "Unipolar major depression in adults: Choosing initial treatment", section on 'Selecting an antidepressant'.)

For moderate to severe episodes of minor depression that is not responsive to psychotherapy alone, we add pharmacotherapy rather than switching to pharmacotherapy alone because antidepressant monotherapy is generally not beneficial.

Medication monotherapy — Treatment of minor depression with antidepressant medication monotherapy is generally not beneficial [37,38]:

●A meta-analysis of six randomized trials (468 patients) compared antidepressants with placebo and found that response was comparable for the two groups (41 and 38 percent) [21]
●In a subsequent 12-week randomized trial that compared citalopram (20 mg/day) with placebo in 47 patients, improvement of symptoms was comparable [34]
However, primary care patients with minor depression who have more severe symptoms and functional impairment may possibly benefit from an antidepressant:

●An 11-week randomized trial that compared paroxetine (10 to 40 mg/day) with placebo in 138 patients found that improvement was comparable for the two groups [39]. However, a separate analysis divided patients into three groups according to the severity of depressive symptoms and functional impairment; in the group with the greatest severity, improvement was superior in patients who received the antidepressant rather than placebo.
●A six-week randomized trial compared amitriptyline (median dose 125 mg/day) with placebo in 141 patients with major or minor depression who completed at least four weeks of treatment, and found that improvement was superior with active drug. In a separate analysis, patients were divided into three groups according to symptom severity; among patients with either the greatest or intermediate level of severity, amitriptyline was beneficial [40,41].
In addition, antidepressants are often acceptable to patients with minor depression. A meta-analysis of two randomized trials in 186 patients found that the dropout rate for any reason was comparable for antidepressants and placebo (27 and 25 percent); there was little to no heterogeneity across studies [21].

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

●The clinical presentation of minor depression often includes somatic, emotional, cognitive, and neurovegetative symptoms, as well as suicidality. (See 'Terminology' above and "Unipolar minor depression in adults: Epidemiology, clinical presentation, and diagnosis".)
●Treatment options for minor depression include watchful waiting, psychotherapy, and pharmacotherapy. However, the benefits of these interventions are often modest. In addition, treatments that are effective for unipolar major depression (eg, collaborative care) are not necessarily beneficial for minor depression. (See 'General principles' above.)
●For patients with minor depression who are mildly ill (no suicidality and little to no functional impairment), we suggest watchful waiting rather than pharmacotherapy or psychotherapy (Grade 2B). Patients are monitored every two to six weeks to ensure that symptoms are not worsening; in addition, it is helpful to educate patients about depression. However, initiating psychotherapy is a reasonable alternative to watchful waiting. In addition, if symptoms worsen during watchful waiting such that the minor depressive episode becomes moderate to severe, the patient should be treated. (See 'Mild illness' above.)
●Moderate to severe episodes of minor depression are characterized by the presence of suicidal ideation or behavior, and/or moderate to severe functional impairment. For patients with minor depression who are moderately to severely ill, we suggest psychotherapy as a first treatment option rather than pharmacotherapy (Grade 2B). We generally use cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) because it is the most widely studied option and is frequently more available. However, reasonable alternatives include interpersonal psychotherapy and problem solving therapy. (See 'First line' above.)
●For patients with moderate to severe episodes of minor depression that does not respond to psychotherapy within four to eight sessions, we suggest adding an antidepressant rather than continuing psychotherapy alone or switching to antidepressant monotherapy (Grade 2C). (See 'Psychotherapy plus pharmacotherapy' above.)
●Treatment of mild episodes of minor depression with antidepressant medication monotherapy is typically not beneficial; however, patients with more severe symptoms and functional impairment may possibly benefit from an antidepressant alone. (See 'Medication monotherapy' above.)