Democratic incumbent North Carolina Senator Kay Hagen had this to say about global warming in a letter to President Obama back in 2009: "Climate change is a global problem that demands a global solution. A strong international climate agreement is an important step toward reducing greenhouse gas emissions. When Congress considers climate legislation, I will be focused on protecting North Carolinian manufacturing jobs. I look forward to working with my colleagues to craft comprehensive energy legislation that will reduce our dependence on foreign oil, create jobs, and support a clean energy economy that will benefit North Carolina."Here is what the Rev. Mark Harris, Heather Grant, Dr. Greg Brannon and North Carolina House Speaker Thom Tillis had to say about global warming when asked if it's a fact at a GOP senatorial primary debate Wednesday: "Ha, Ha, Ha, Ha, Ha." Maybe they just laughed to ingratiate themselves with the Republican voters in the audience who began the laughing at one of the most critical questions a person seeking to govern this dying land on a dying globe can be asked. After the guffaws, each of the four yahoos seeking to replace a caring, thoughtful senator, said "No", albeit the doctor of the bunch, Greg Brannon added "God controls the climate". Maybe good doctor Brannon, counseling a fifty year smoker just given a death sentence from advanced lung cancer, advises "God controls whether or not you get lung cancer".Not to be limited by their denial of climate change as single issue candidates, the Fab Four seeking to set policy for the 320 million of us hoping to sustain Mother Earth for our children and grandchildren, showed their issue versatility by also coming out against the Affordable Care Act, and eliminating the IRS, the Department of Education, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Health and Human Services.North Carolina is a pretty state. Sadly, the North Carolina GOP is pretty pathetic.This post is contributed by a community member. The views expressed in this blog are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect those of Patch Media Corporation. Everyone is welcome to submit a post to Patch. If you'd like to post a blog, go here to get started.Find your Patch

⋅

Start a Blog