By P Gosselin on 6. Februar 2012“THE CO2 LIES … pure fear-mongering … should we blindly trust the experts?”That’s what Germany’s leading daily Bild (see photo) wrote in its print and online editions today, on the very day that renowned publisher Hoffmann & Campe officially released a skeptic book – one written by a prominent socialist and environmental figure.This is huge. More than I ever could have possibly imagined. And more is coming in the days ahead! The Bild piece was just the first of a series.Mark this as the date that Germany’s global warming movement took a massive body blow.Today, not one, but two of Germany’s most widely read news media published comprehensive skeptical climate science articles in their print and online editions, coinciding with the release of a major climate skeptical book, Die kalte Sonne (The Cold Sun).Germany has now plunged into raucus discord on the heated topic of climate changeWhat has set it all off? One of the fathers of Germany’s modern green movement, Professor Dr. Fritz Vahrenholt, a social democrat and green activist, decided to author a climate science skeptical book together with geologist/paleontologist Dr. Sebastian Lüning. Vahrenholt’s skepticism started when he was asked to review an IPCC report on renewable energy. He found hundreds of errors. When he pointed them out, IPCC officials simply brushed them aside. Stunned, he asked himself, “Is this the way they approached the climate assessment reports?”Vahrenholt decided to do some digging. His colleague Dr. Lüning also gave him a copy of Andrew Montford’s The Hockey Stick Illusion. He was horrified by the sloppiness and deception he found. Persuaded by Hoffmann & Campe, he and Lüning decided to write the book. Die kalte Sonne cites 800 sources and has over 80 charts and figures. It examines and summarizes the latest science.Conclusion: climate catastrophe is called offThe science was hyped. The book started hitting the bookshops today and has already hit no. 1 on the Amazon.de list for environment books. Indications show that it will climb very high in the overall bestseller charts. It’s published by a renowned publishing house and is now sending shock waves through the German climate science establishment. The first printing will produce 20,000 copies. I expect they will sell out rather quickly.Today Germany’s national tabloid Bild (which has a whopping circulation of 16 million) devoted half of page 2 on an article called:THE CO2 LIERenowned team of scientists claim the climate catastrophe is fear-mongering by politics“The widely read Bild will follow with the rest of the series in the days ahead. In part I today Bild presents “What the IPCC of the UN doesn’t tell you.” Bild asks “what if the IPCC is wrong? Can we really blindly trust these experts? Are they really independent?”Bild then writes:The phenomenal prognoses of heat from the IPCC are pure fear-mongering.”The Bild series is sure to cause radical environmentalists to seethe and lash out. Expect an all-out assault in the days and weeks ahead. Already the reaction from activists has been swift and virulent – though they have yet to read the book.They never wanted the debate – and now the dam has brokenAnd the floods of skepticism are sweeping over the country. Worse, Germany’s flagship weekly news magazine Der Spiegel today also featured a 4-page exclusive interview with Vahrenholt, where he repeated that the IPCC has ignored a large part of climate science and that IPCC scientists exaggerated the impact of CO2 on climate. Vahrenholt said that by extending the known natural cycles of the past into the future, and taking CO2′s real impact into effect, we should expect a few tenths of a degree of cooling.At a press conference today in Berlin, Vahrenholt, Lüning and publisher Hoffmann & Campe introduced the book and answered reporters’ questions. When asked why Hoffmann & Campe decided to publish “such a book”, the spokesman simply answered that the time is right – and there’s a real audience for the book. Even the weather timing was right! Germany is now experiencing it’s worst cold snap in 26 years. That makes it hard to deny lack of warming.It needs to be pointed out Vahrenholt and Lüning are not skeptics; they are lukewarmers who have not been able to find any evidence of a coming climate catastrophe. They believe that man should switch to renewables, but do so in a rational manner: “Work fast, but don’t hurry.”Skeptic readers should not think that the book will fortify their existing skepticism of CO2 causing warming. The authors agree it does. but have major qualms about the assumed positive CO2-related feed-backs and believe the sun plays a far greater role in the whole scheme of things.The book cites more than 800 sources – including the latest peer-reviewed literature. It includes more than 80 graphics that clearly illustrate that all is not well with the claims made by alarmist science. It is written so that laymen can easily digest the material and it provides a comprehensive overview of the science and where it stands today.The book has also infuriated the AGW leadership in Germany. For example, academia. University of Osnabrück took the step of dis-inviting Professor Vahrenholt who was scheduled to give a speech on February 8. The University claimed that Vahrenholt’s skeptical views were “provocative”. Also the centre-left SPD party, where Vahrenholt is a member, has been deafeningly silent.This cat is out of the bag – and it’s not going back in.The authors have set up a website for Die kalte Sonne here.Posted in Cooling, Media / Bias, Scepticism  | 200 ResponsesI have only one thing to say:  “Wunderbar!”The AGW denial hoax is on its last legs.This is very good news!EcotretasThe Bild series is sure to cause radical environmentalists to seethe and lash out. Expect an all-out assault in the days and weeks ahead. Already the reaction from activists has been swift and virulent – though they have yet to read the book. [emphasis added -hro]But this is standard operating procedure on the part of the activists  – as we saw from their “responses” (see, for example Odes for Peter Gleick) to Donna Laframboise’s The Delinquent Teenager Who Was Mistaken for the World’s Top Climate Expert [for which, btw, I understand a German translation is in the works].Nonetheless, as you say, the dam has finally brokenAny word on when/if there will be an English translation of  Die kalte Sonne?!Not surprising at all. The Germans have realised that the renewables gravy train is not sustainable. Ironic but true. You cannot promise a 55 eurocent kWh subsidy and sell electricity at 13 eurocents to the consumer. Someone must be the bagman and nobody wants to be. The peripheral economies that were milked in the past are in debt, so the usual victims are gone. The only choice is to “discredit” the foundation on which the bubble was based.We are entering phase two of the operation. The only surprise is that it took this long to happen.Nikh–p://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rmCpOKtN8ME
(just a little singin’ and  dancin’)This is huge. There’s been a big change in public opinion in the UK gradually over the last year or so, but now…http://diggingintheclay.wordpress.com/2012/02/01/a-tipping-point-reached/Do follow this up with the reaction of the other media and the public.  This is so worth watching.It is fantastic, Merko is a physicist – is she not, then, I wonder what she makes of it all?  Mind you, she should already have known, that AGW was a crock!Germans and the whole of GERMANY,  get the real picture at last!And it should be remembered, just how you have played a very significant part PG, always pushing and cajoling [gently for the most part] and calling for reasoned and objective news coverage.Well my friend, here it is!…………..Und ist es nicht gut?No Tricks Zone,  we, all of us realists in Britain say: “DANKE!”Terrorists are being brought to justice in criminal  courts these days…
Al Gore and the global warming alarmists such as left wing politicians, pseudo scientists, journalists, the Hollywood idiots, have  been inflicting psychological terrorism upon a whole generation of children all over the world for the last 20 years.
These charlatans should be brought to justice as the perpetrators of the biggest scam in the history of this planet.
The social,financial and psychological damages that they caused are beyond comprehension.
No criminal organization in history has ever come even close to having such a dezastruous impact on so many people, for such a long time, and make so much money in the process.
They should not be permitted to get away with it.Hundred of billions have been wasted on a fraud, social and economical policies have been altered based on a fraud….the moral authors of this fraud should be in jail for the rest of their lives and their fortune seized.BTW, exciting times PG.Frau Angela, a.k.a. Tina, is a specialist in decay processes:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angela_Merkel#cite_note-9“After being awarded a doctorate (Dr. rer. nat.) for her thesis on quantum chemistry,[10] she worked as a researcher and published several papers.
10. Merkel, Angela (1986) (in German). Untersuchung des Mechanismus von Zerfallsreaktionen mit einfachem Bindungsbruch und Berechnung ihrer Geschwindigkeitskonstanten auf der Grundlage quantenchemischer und statistischer Methoden (Investigation of the mechanism of decay reactions with single bond breaking and calculation of their velocity constants on the basis of quantum chemical and statistical methods). Berlin: Academy of Sciences of the German Democratic Republic (dissertation). cited in Langguth, Gerd (August 2005) (in German). Angela Merkel. Munich: DTV. p. 109. ISBN 3-423-24495-2. and listed in the Catalogue of the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek under subject code 30 (Chemistry)”Make of that what you will.Make of it what I will?a) “Process PhD” — socialist love process because it liberates them from responsibility,
b) “Fachidiot” — learning so much about one thing that you become an idot at everything else,
c) Doof studiert — studying yourself to stupidity.Sorry, nuances don’t translate well.Odds are on a).How about: “that was the theoretical side – now she’s working on the practical applications”?Er…………………..thanks Ulrich, not sure that helps sir:>))Lemme think about it![...] Body Blow To German Global Warming Movement! Major Media Outlets Unload On “CO2 Lies!” [...]Just when I thought the Germans were going to allow us to overtake them economically, they come to their senses.Cet article a fait ma journée au Québec (it made my day here in Quebec).Frost in Germany shuts down hundreds of Diesel cars. Fuel filters get clogged by Parafine crystals at temperatures under -22 deg C; and it is not possible to add gasoline to the mix when you have a modern Diesel; they’re too fragile to survive that. (allegedly. I don’t have a Diesel ATM so I can’t run the experiment. Often such statements have more to do with liability than with technology. I’ll ask a colleague, maybe he wants to play. Wonder which subsystems will survive.)
http://auto.t-online.de/kaeltewelle-frost-legt-hunderte-autos-mit-dieselmotor-lahm/id_53803260/indexMonday night had temperatures of -28 deg C and colder.More incompetence at the fuel suppliers. Unable to supply a proper, winter diesel.OTOH: I wonder how all those people are doing in their electric cars?It should be noted that even with surface temperature of -20 deg C and no winds, no significant longwave infrared heating from above was noticeable.
Yesterday, wind power in Germany produced 600 MW out of a possible 18 GW.I agree with Ecotretas. This is muito bom. But, sit back and watch the slanderous counter-attacks by the warmistas. Mind you, to have these two publications headline the story so strongly (the actual story being the publication of this “skeptical” book by greenies)  is certainly a breakthrough. This is a fist in the face that cannot be ignored; await heavy artillary of slander, invective and vituperation from the warmistas…. they have too much money at stake.Edward, Merkel is a politician. Politicians do not flog dead horses; they ride them until they are dead, then jump horse.Agreed Robert!You forgot the part where they accept their well-earned retirement/severance entitlement that would pay for a solar-powered unicorn in every African garage.Too true about the peppercorns, yet they invest (and are supported to do so) in many-a-scheme, and that aligned, to the benefit of … yes..the government and their leeches………..see John Pasquarelli (Australia/PNG) on the subject:-Super Rort Speech for Woodpeckers
http://www.gwb.com.au/gwb/news/pasquarelli/280899.htmandhttp://australianconservative.com/2010/10/rise-of-the-apparatchik-infects-and-perverts-our-political-system/Robert great observation—very astute and hillarious.The two major errors were(1)  assuming that the Earth’s surface has to radiate like a blackbody and thus would have been -18 degrees C if there were no “greenhouse” gases.   But the surface loses thermal energy by diffusion, conduction, convection, evaporation and chemical processes, leaving far less than 50% of the energy to be radiated.  So you cannot apply the Stefan-Boltzmann Law as if all energy is radiated.(2)  assuming that radiative flux (energy) from a colder atmosphere can be converted to thermal energy when it strikes a significantly warmer surface.For more detail see my site http://climate-change-theory.comHave you visited  Tallbloke?http://tallbloke.wordpress.com/2012/02/09/nikolov-zeller-reply-eschenbach/#comment-17026[...] (and in particular Germany’s) deep-green-tinted “science”. But as Pierre Gosselin noted in a post today: “THE CO2 LIES … pure fear-mongering … should we blindly trust the [...]When Bild starts kicking it, that horse is dead.Pity the Germans have allready pissed away at least $50Bn, they are not as smart as they used to be.You seem to have a fine collection of brain dead twits here. So Luning gave him a comic book and suddenly a :truth” was revealed to him.It takes only a very elementary understanding of physics to know what sick crap this is.I wonder that these two can sleep nights. Is a few minutes of notoriety that important to them?You are resorting to insults. That means you don’t have an argument.
As for the elementary understanding of physics: This video presentation by a CERN physicist might help you.
http://cdsweb.cern.ch/record/1181073/I have an advanced understanding of physics, I don’t believe in any human induced climate catastrophe. I don’t think I ever have. I don’t know any physics professors who believe in CAGW, and I’ve known quite a few.The argument falls flat on its face from the beginning. We’re told to believe that the earth can be “tipped” by human activity into a runaway warming situation. This situation would require that the earth have an unstable climate system.  However the nice hockey stick graph that the IPCC loves to repeat over and over with different “independent” researchers shows one thousand years (1000) or more of temperature stability within 0.2 degrees C.So how is it that we’ve had 1000+ years of perfect stability, but the system is unstable? It doesn’t make sense.Actually more like 10,000 years of unusually stable climate, but if no more than 0.25W/m² of orbital forcing is enough to take the planet into and out of glaciations, and raise or lower the global temperature by 5°C, then our 2.4W/m² must surely be enough to have a large influence on climate too.  It’s really only a matter of how great the Earth’s energy imbalance is, and for how long.  If there was some realistic way to quickly get CO₂ back down to 350ppm or something of that order, then we could probably avoid the worst consequences, thanks to the large thermal inertia of the climate system.  Otherwise… well, we’re pretty much stuffed.Assuming that it was these alleged 0.25 W/m ^2 that drove the planet in and out of glaciations is a leap of faith, as behind these numbers linger climate models, and we know how bad they are at getting anything right.Furthermore, even if this number is true, it shows not the sensitivity towards a switch to a HotHouse Earth climate but the sensitivity to another glaciation. Assuming that these two risks are identical would be foolish, as there has not been a Hothouse Earth for many millions of years – so “HotHouse” looks much more unlikely than “Glaciation”.Achtungate:It must be difficult to lose face. Loosing face is a big thing in Asia, I should know I live there. I suspect that it is the same all over the world. But some people have no face to lose. Maybe saving face is one of the reasons for the religious fever attached to people who believe that CAGW is the new holy gospel. Who knows? I have never managed to understand fanaticism and properly never will. Now very importantly on that point of face: All the scandals and this fantastic new development from Germany have now given the people who more or less believed in CAGW a way out. “Without losing face”. Think about that for a minute.  I predict that this day is the turning point in history, even more than the previous gates. I call this one achtungate.“Schultzgate” might work better in countries where Hogan’s Heroes has been on TV.“I see nothing. Nothing!”There is a good Aussie saying that sums up this glorious news. “Good Sh*t”.[...] says Pierre Gosselin over at No Tricks Zone  Body Blow To German Global Warming Movement! Major Media Outlets Unload On “CO2 Lies!” By P [...]GERMANY, the DISGRACE of Europe.[snip - sorry, over the line -PG].
…Robert, actually they ride them till they die, flog them for dying then stand on them a while  before they jump ![...] Body Blow To German Global Warming Movement! Major Media Outlets Unload On “CO2 Lies!” [...]Well, they managed to pull down the Berlin Wall. Now it looks like they are taking the hammer to CAGW! Brick by brick it is falling but there is a long fight to go yet. I see even the new Minister in the UK that has taken over from the hidious fool Huhne has backtracked and wants Nuclear moving now!Mind that crack in the ice, its getting widerExcuse my spelling but the German version of a famous Japanese Haiku goes;“Wolken und nebel sind doch nur luftgestalten.
Uber earnen shint erwig der sonne, der mond”.Clouds and mist are just air forms. Over these shine always the sun and the moon.University of Osnabrück took the step of dis-inviting Professor Vahrenholt who was scheduled to give a speech on February 8. The University claimed that Vahrenholt’s skeptical views were “provocative”.Who needs further proof that CAGW advocates are complete, incompetent idiots?  The perfect way to destroy your public credibility.[...] Body Blow To German Global Warming Movement! Major Media Outlets Unload On “CO2 Lies!” [...]Days are currently between -8 to -10 celsius here in Vienna. Nights are colder. On the other side of the world Japan is reporting low temperature redords in 38 locations.In the past 30+ years we had one untypically warm winter (2006 if my memory serves me right), all other winters were normal. Yet we’re being told that global warming is happening because of us.And of course the CO2 thing is a lie. Yes, CO2 can cause such an effect, in concentrations above 60%. But we’re at 0.039% CO2 in the atmosphere. That’s nothing. But hey, just last year Al Gore claimed in an “experiment” that an atmosphere with 100% CO2 is the same as one with 0.039%. So much for that.Now if the Germans would only realize that they’re being lied to about nuclear power as well….Andreas, You say its minus 8 t 10 in Vienna. Good job the world is warming!Just think how cold you would have been it was actually cooling!This is really great news, for all of you in Germany (and the rest of Europe).  Some reality at last.   Well done for all the work you have done on the NoTricksZone, I am sure it will have contributed to this return to sanity.It will be interesting to see Merkel’s response to this coverage, please keep us informed.Top posting on WUWT.
Top posting on Climate Depot.I am elated at this news breaking. I hope (dare I say pray?) that it will shake the scum in Canberra……. and make them reconsider the dreaded Carbon Tax? Yes I do believe in flying pigs tooVery interesting development Pierre, hats off to you and other climate realists in Germany and the rest of Europe.Great news PG. No better indication of the “beginning of the end” than when a previously compliant and supportive media turns feral ! Watch now for red-faced self-styled journalists back-tracking and claiming they’d always had their doubts but were misled by evil self-serving grants-driven scientists.Meanwhile in Australia the madness continues as our lying, spinning politicians aided by a silent MSM continue to keep a gullible public in the dark about what’s going on in the real world.Darn…more pesky facts released by NASA.  Until NASA, NOAA, and other climate researchers quit releasing facts and doing actual studies, this “global cooling” thing isn’t getting much traction.The global cooling folks keep saying “its the sun”…..”the sun.”  And then when its proven it ISN’T solar activity…..then its “something else.”The NASA article is titled:  “NASA: Human Activity, Not Solar Activity, Drives Global Warming and Returning to 350 ppm Is Needed to Stop It.”And here is the link:  http://thinkprogress.org/romm/2012/02/05/419064/nasa-human-activity-not-solar-activity-drives-global-warming-350-ppm/That article is from Hansen via Joe Romm. What do you expect? NASA is going to have one big black eye.Hansen says
“However, given that the imbalance of 0.58±0.15 W/m2 was measured during a deep solar minimum”This is wrong. A “deep solar minimum” like the Maunder minimum is about to begin now as the solar magnetic field diminishes. What we had between 2005 and 2010 was a pretty long but ordinary minimum.There have been sunspots during all this time. The deep solar minimum begins when the solar magnetic field becomes too weak to maintain sunspots, and they vanish altogether.Like communism this belief in AGW will die as well. It is  based on lies not observable facts. CO2 does not drive temperature. The theory of GHG’s is based on error and thermodynamic law violations so cannot work.[...] Body Blow To German Global Warming Movement! Major Media Outlets Unload On “CO2 Lies!” http://notrickszone.com/2012/02/06/body-blow-to-german-global-warming-movement-major-media-outlets-u… [...][...] Read more here: http://notrickszone.com/2012/02/06/body-blow-to-german-global-warming-movement-major-media-outlets-u… [...]Let’s be glad that the authors are luke-warmers. In the mean time we can enjoy the hard lines here. Tonight I get some people at dinner, two of them alarmists. I will make for them ‘Sauerkraut und Bratwurst’ as a celebration of this event.Pierre,
Can you do a post on part 2 in today’s Bild that says
“Warming has stopped for the last 12 years”
and goes on to talk about the influence of ocean cycles.The story is promently published on WeltOnline today:Fritz Vahrenholt
Geht die Klimakatastrophe an der Erde vorbei?
Will the climate catastrophe pass earth?For years he was spreading the theses of the IPCC. Now the former senator for environment and manager performs a change of mind (…)Fritz Vahrenholt: Yes, I was an active supporter of the CO2 theory. But then I had two key moments, that made me reassess my Position (…)Varenholt says that the first crucial experience he describes was an IPCC meeting about renewable energies, which was, according to Varenholt “anything but scientific”. The report was full of mistakes and the final version was edited by a Greenpeace representative. (This report. Here is a statement from ClimateAudit. )The second key moment was the findings of a study his company RWE Innogy had carrfied out, in which was found, that natural processes are a main driver of climate change.…Probably one of the biggest issues every religion has to face from time to time is statements of former believers which have fallen from faith…[...] Professor Fritz Vahrenholt, is a former environment minister and well-known green activist. P Gosselin at No Tricks Zone has the story: What has set it all off? One of the fathers of Germany’s modern green movement, [...]Whoa James! Slow down. Fritz Vahrenholt is nothing like Moonbat Monbiot.
I’m convinced that Professor Vahrenholt is a truly honest guy. He believed the IPCC at first, until he was made aware of all the errors and riff raff. Then he changed his mind. Vahrenholt could have easily just kept quiet about it, kept lots of friends and enjoyed a nice quiet retirement. Instead he is really sticking his neck out to get the truth out. Monbiot is a caricature by comparison.I am a biologist. 12 years ago I was in the Arctic collecting soil samples, A meteorologist I met there told me the following.
The contribution of human CO2 emissions to global temperatues lie in the second place of decimals of a degree centigrade. They may reinforce natural warming, or mitigate natural cooling, by a few hundredths of a degree, but they do not drive our climate.
 I have been spreading this message as widely as possible in the UK. Please spread in Germany alsoSure it was not an eskimo you were talkin to? They know alot about climate and such. Don´t you in youre silly mind think that climatologiskt and the rest know how CO2 works? Sht, even Arhennius did that 100+ years ago!As the supposed slowdown of global warming fails to materialise, the public are going to realise how badly they’ve been conned by the architects of the AGW denial hoax.  I think at that point they will get very, very angry.[...] on to the latest high profile defections: One of the fathers of Germany’s modern green movement, Professor Dr. Fritz Vahrenholt, a social [...][...] CO2 LIES … pure fear-mongering … should we blindly trust the experts?” see here for the original article.To [...]This blog post is of the same quality as the “Bild” newspaper.  Fact-free.Listen guys, everybody understands that you are nuts in the US.  That’s ok.  Just keep it to yourselves, and don’t try to drag decent countries into it, ok?DOT, this is true.  Some people like to dismiss AGW regardless of the facts.  If you give them the facts, they just cry “fraud!”.  If you show them that multiple reviews found that no such fraud occurred, they just take it as evidence that the conspiracy is even bigger than they thought.It’s quite hard to reason an AGW denier out of their position when they didn’t adopt it by reason in the first place, but rather by ideology or the profit motive.DOT, and Icarus, all that you have are the climate models. Once again: READ THE IPCC AR4. They have no predictive skill, as the IPCC itself makes clear.If you have a factual argument to make, MAKE IT. But don’t point to the N-th time Hansen cites himself with a model based study based on a model based study.The positive water vapor feedback is a lie. Get over it. It has not been observed anywhere on the planet.I have posted a second article on Dr. Habibullo Abdussamatov, Dr. Sc.
Head of Space Research Laboratory of the Pulkovo Observatory,
Head of the Russian/Ukrainian Joint Project Astrometria:“Bicentennial Decrease of the Total Solar Irradiance Leads to Unbalanced Thermal Budget of the Earth and the Little Ice Age”.“From early 90s we observe bicentennial decrease in both the TSI and the portion of its energy absorbed by the Earth.
The Earth as a planet will henceforward have negative balance in the energy budget which will result in the temperature drop in approximately 2014.
Due to increase of albedo and decrease of the greenhouse gases atmospheric concentration the absorbed portion of solar energy and the influence of the greenhouse effect will additionally decline.
The influence of the consecutive chain of feedback effects which can lead to additional drop of temperature will surpass the influence of the TSI decrease.
The onset of the deep bicentennial minimum of TSI is expected in 2042±11, that of the 19th Little Ice Age in the past 7500 years – in 2055±11.”http://www.oarval.org/ClimateChangeBW.htmI  do hope nobody is going to let Angela Merkel live down her promise, along with Gordon Brown, “not to allow the temperature increase in the next 100 years to be higher than 2C” – or something like that.[...] on to the latest high profile defections: One of the fathers of Germany’s modern green movement, Professor Dr. Fritz Vahrenholt, a social [...][...] reports: “THE CO2 LIES … pure fear-mongering … should we blindly trust the [...]Endlich!In France, unfortunatly, our media are always lying and disinform the citizen… and if you say that IPCC is mainly involved in politics, and that science it used is bad science, you are immediatly attacked and you are insulted as “denier”.But I hope it will change in the near future…Wiederlesen!…If you understand French, read this document from Marcel Leroux :http://www.biokurs.de/treibhaus/180CO2/Echanges-meridiens-Chang-clim.pdfBis bald!….@Icarus62Would you like to see all scientific opposition to AGW silenced?
That would be a very undemocratic position to take, the debate on AGW based climate change has been a one sided debate and the establishment of AGW have been behaving like Tyrants for far too long.FACT: The “IPCC scientists exaggerated the impact of CO2 on climate.” This information is becoming available to the public and the lies are being exposed, the rise in skepticism is the result of the public beginning to understand the issue including it’s dishonest re-branding of AGW to “Climate Change”, Carbon taxes, fraudulent carbon markets and even the Freudian rhetoric of Freezing winters being caused by Man Made Global Warming, You would have to be a fool to blindly accept the Idea that Man made CO2 (a small addition to a trace gas) that plants and animals need, somehow overwhelms the power of the Sun and all or any effect other gases including water vapor and the two major gases have on the atmosphere.Icarus62 It’s now becoming clear to everyone that You and the dwindling group of other proponents of the AGW climate change argument don’t even stand up to the smallest of criticisms,  why should you be taken seriously?“Sparks
@Icarus62Would you like to see all scientific opposition to AGW silenced?”No, just the unscientific opposition.Selectively calling your scientific opposition “unscientific” is an attempt to silence their views and it’s this type of tyrannical, undemocratic behavior I was referring to above.Can’t you see the nature of the position you have taken?If I say “It’s fine to drink a gallon of bleach, it can’t possibly do you any harm at all”, not only is that unscientific (because there is no doubt that it’s false) but it’s also dangerous, irresponsible, reckless and probably prosecutable.  The same applies to AGW denial.Being Skeptical of a scientific view or having scientific differences is not a crime, maybe in your fanciful undemocratic world it is, but certainly not in mine, we all have a right to asses the evidence (or lack of evidence) and adapt our views as the evidence changes. I will point out what is a prosecutable offense, knowingly producing fraudulent information and or data through public finances.Just because you see a bottle of bleach, it doesn’t mean someone is going to come along and drink it.“scientific differences”, exactly – what you see in the AGW denial hoax is not scientific differences but a blatant and very well funded effort to deceive the public.  The deniers lost the scientific argument long ago so they avoid genuine science and focus on lies and slander.  Therein lies the shockingly unethical nature of the hoax.  It’s a betrayal, a reckless bid to protect fossil fuel profits regardless of the appalling cost to civilisation.Icarus62,
Go to http://www.drroyspencer.com/
read everything on his blog, then come back here and apologize. Pay special attention to what Dr. Spencer has to say about CO2 sensitivity.I completely missed that – Icarus is a fiend of Free Speech. Thanks, Icarus, for showing your true colors. So when I call you a totalitarian, it is no more an insult but characterizes your position accurately.Does ‘free speech’ include the right to knowingly and wilfully deceive the public, to expose them to danger that they might otherwise seek to avoid?You don’t even know what Free Speech means? Were your parents totalitarian as well so you didn’t learn the concept?I suppose they will be subject to arrest in Australia.@ icarus62
The bleach statement you use as example is a scientific statement because it can be tested . When tested it turns out to be false. So now we know.
All statements by the IPCC are unscientific because they cannot be tested, they are full of ‘is expected to’, ‘is predicted’, ‘may’, ‘can’, ‘model projections show’, ‘as long as’, ‘is uncertain’, ‘so-and-so proposed that’, ‘would’, ‘may result in’, ‘could lead to’, ‘may change’. These examples are taken from IPCC 2007 AR4 WG1 sections 7.3.4.3 and .4 .  IPCC does not satisfy the principle of falsifiability or testability as required from good science. Their statements are untestable.  Besides their statements are not peer-reviewed but pals-reviewed, and the pals are from Greenpeace and WWF.  IPCC is managed by a mafia who were once scientists but degenerated into cherrypickers of the AGW flavoured science literature at the expense of the non-AGW flavour. That made the IPCC pseudo- scientists. It did not affect their self-esteem, after all they enjoyed the salary and the travel perks instead.“His colleague Dr. Lüning also gave him a copy of Andrew Montford’s The Hockey Stick Illusion. He was horrified by the sloppiness and deception he found.”Doesn’t surprise me at all, I’ve only visited Montford’s blog a couple of times and came to the same conclusion.Spencer is a [-snip].  He has nothing of any use to say about climate science.I think Icarus62 is a desperate CAGW gravy train rider. He has no proof for his accusations and doesn’t present any evidence.Spencer and Christy were caught out fiddling the UAH series to make it look like there was very little global warming.  The scientific community forced them to admit it, and correct it.  That’s a matter of public record.  They got away with it for about 10 years before being exposed, IIRC.  The only reason anyone would believe frauds like that is if it’s something they want to hear.The satellite instruments had calibration problems. The problems were not anticipated so they went undetected for a while. It was not deliberate fraud.It was fraud.  They did everything they could to minimise warming in their series before finally being exposed by the scientific community.Shut up, Totalitarian; we don’t like your ilk around here.Icarus62,
That accusation is libelous. Can you back it up? In court?[...] upon which the Bild story is based.  Since we don’t read German, we will borrow from a post on the No Tricks Zone blog, which specializes in reporting climate news from Germany, in English. “THE CO2 LIES … pure [...]..I look forward to the book being available in Australia
will this mean a cessation of building those wind turbines that in the construction have polluted China in such a way that if it was a multi national company …the envoiromentalist/greens would have been up in arms….
lets all take a deep breath and wait for the fall outHere in Australia, the mainstream press has not reported this great news, but then we have internet and media censorship of  articles that put our (socialist) government in bad light(and most Australians think we live in a robust democracy). It will be a truly delicious irony if the whole AGW scam/ Fabian hidden agenda of the UN comes unstuck in Germany. Something very few people realize is that the Nazis were born of the Green Socialist movement- they were Fabians resorting to bullets as well as bulls&$t. The “Fascist” derision after the war was to deflect attention away from the underlying cause of the National Socialists. It was always Hitler’s intention to keep business in check if they did not do as was expected of them. If the great Fabian victory ever succeeds(heaven forbid) those banks and other business entities that have been made grand promises for their support will find themselves being shafted-the same tactic the Nazis did on Norway via Quisling. For those who are not up to date with this grand treachery, Hitler made promises of land and power for the support of the government of Vidkun Quisling, but it was just a big lie-the Nazis just came in and  effectively raped the country. It was an act of incredible bravery that a single public servant was able to hide the gold from the treasury from the Nazis. Any money the same tactic is being used on world leaders with promises of unelected power for support of the UN. What a sad indictment on the human race that we can fall for the same trick(appeal to greed) twice in living memory. If I were a man of religion, I would deem the work of the IPCC to be the work of the DEVIL.Finally some great news, thankyou Germany , here in Australia we are just getting force fed lies, from a Government that started with lies, ” there will be no Carbon Tax under the Government that I lead”, make no mistake, in our great country this PM is dispised & yet the ball still rolls , their climate experts have proven to be a joke after joke , yet remain elevated under this PM. I only hope that your waking up will be our lifeline. Well Done, I wish you the best.[...] Germany’s Bild tells a million of readers:   THE CO2 LIE [...]At last!If the truth is coming out in Germany after all these years of lies means anything, it is the Climate Fraud and Carcon Tax Scam has hit a Concrete Wall.
And FINISHED!
Now,
How do we get back all our taxes stolen in the name of science?
You realise that the jails of the world are going to be full of crooked and convicted scientists. And no forgetting the lying politicians of every colour.Red/Green and even Blue.@Icarus62Actually it is possible to drink bleach safely at the correct dilution level. Bleach has been recommended for water treatment for campers and wilderness survival. It could save you life if you are lost in the forest.As an old retired geologist I recognized “hair in the biscuits” the moment I read the Kyoto Protocols over 10 years ago. I couldn’t believe they were serious until I recognized the environmentalist signature (blame humanity) of the utter BS in their AGW hypothesis.. There are glaring errors to anyone knowing anything about  the Pleistocene Ice Ages of which we are still in  Interglacial stage #5,  of a series of 100 thousand year glaciations that have beset the northern hemisphere for nearly the past million years. The idea that we are about to burn up because of greenhouse gases has no counterpart in past climates. As long as we have a cooler than normal
climate today and ice in our polar regions, I believe it foolhardy to try to reduce greenhouse gases.All this absurd and laughable denial… AGW is an established fact beyond the slightest plausible doubt as we all know, but disputing that is rather academic at this stage in any case.  It’s clear that we cannot realistically avoid the devastating global warming that we’ve triggered.  We are going to see perhaps 8 or 10 degrees C of global warming because no country is going to keep valuable fossil fuels in the ground as long as the EROEI makes extraction viable, so they will be burned sooner or later, and that spells disaster for global civilisation.James Lovelock’s prediction of a reduction of global population to 1 billion by 2100 could be unduly optimistic…It has not warmed over the last decade, so whatever influence CO2 has, natural factors have been able to offset the influence of a growing CO2 concentration. This in contradiction to the IPCC’s model projection. You say AGW is an established fact beyond the slightest possible doubt – if that were true, the model projections would not have been falsified by real events. So the models are wrong; we have to reconsider all predictions and projections by the warmists.In reality global warming hasn’t even slowed down, so that knocks the latest denier nonsense on the head, and there isn’t the least prospect of it slowing down unless we have a global economic collapse sufficient to shut down half the industry and power generation on the planet… and in that kind of devastation I presume there would be a great deal of hardship and loss of life.  So… damned if we do, damned if we don’t.Some background information about the authors:Professor Dr. Fritz Vahrenholt used to work for Shell in his field of public relations until 2001, whereupon he switched to RWE, one of Germany’s largest energy companies… which runs a lot of coal power plants. And his professorship in Chemistry is a honorary one. As far as I can determine, his research work ended in 1975 – after that, his jobs were either political or corporate ones.Sources:
http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fritz_Vahrenholt
http://www.rwe.com/web/cms/de/86244/rwe-innogy/unternehmen/management/prof-dr-fritz-vahrenholt/Dr. Sebastian Lüning, on the other hand, is a geologist and palaeontologist, not a climatologist – you can find his list of publications here:http://www.geo.uni-bremen.de/geochronologie/staff/Sebastian.htmNone of these publications seem to indicate that he is an expert in climatology.Oh, and you might have noticed that a lot of geologists seem to be among the scientists who are skeptical about global warming. But you should keep in mind that just about the only sources of funding and employment for geologists outside of academia are the oil and mining industries…And Sorosorg finances Mr Hansen ..Shell and BP finance CRU………..You look  responsible in your avatar …yet you debate with the worse logic fallacy…..ad hominem.Oh, and “leading daily” sounds better than “leading tabloid” as a description for BILD.One can take it as a litmus test of the whole warmist mindset: just tell people that the world is not going to hell in a handbasket and that you think you have got good reasons for this stance. Unbelief and doubt are understandable, given deacdes of “consensus”, but they should be willing to listen, check the facts for themselves and be delighted if the future is not as black as they were always taught.
Instead they start to shout, stamping their foot, eyes shut: “it’s a FACT, it’s a FACT…” Perhaps one should try to tell them how such behaviour strikes more sober folks.The Left wants to instrumentalize CAGW like they managed to instrumentalize nuclear fear, that’s all. They NEED CAGW to drive their agenda forth.
Exhibit #1:
http://taz.de/Klimakonferenz-in-Berlin/!87067/
“After Nuclear Power Is Before The Coal Death!”The abject failure of national governments to address global warming to any worthwhile degree means that the only sensible course now is self-preservation, starting at the level of the individual and moving up through families and small communities.  Learn to become resilient, reduce your dependence on supermarkets and mains services, forge mutually beneficial links with others who have their eyes open, reduce or eliminate debt, learn practical skills, acquire good tools etc.  Be prepared to move out of high-risk areas (southwest US which is rapidly turning to desert, anywhere at sea level etc.).  Plant drought- and heat-tolerant food trees which can cope with the shifting of climate zones polewards and uphill – at least for a few years.We have no realistic chance now of avoiding catastrophic global warming so hope for the best but prepare for the worst.Well, we managed to survive the hundreds of starving millions in the 1970s, the death of our forests and acidified lakes in the 1980s, the skin cancer from the ozone hole in the 1990s, the end of oil, copper, coal etc. in 2000, the 20 meter sea level rise, the 50 million climate refugees by 2010, the coming ice age, peak oil, the end of coal, a world without bees, a world without working antibiotics, silent spring, nuclear winter, and Y2K. Don’t underestimate our ability to deal with a little Global Warming.“southwest US which is rapidly turning to desert”
NOT!
http://www.nipccreport.org/articles/2011/jul/27jul2011a2.html
There is no long term trend. The recent trend I’d up.
Besides, the SW has BEEN desert for several thousand years. I know the territory. That’s where I live.Ulrich Elkmann:  Great news, I hope you’re right!  Like I said, hope for the best but prepare for the worst.  I’ve already moved uphill and started planting trees.Absolute NH temperatures are 4 deg C BELOW current SH temperatures; (funny, isn’t it?) So if CO2 warms every place on the globe by 2 deg C, Germany will be half on its way to the apocalyptic current climate of Rio De Janeiro.
http://wattsupwiththat.com/2012/02/07/how-reliable-are-global-temperature-anomalies/It looks like you’ve been had, Ikarus. Direct your complaints to James Hansen, GISS; NASA.The NH contains a lot more land at high (therefore cold) latitudes than the SH does.The SH contains a lot more ocean vs land than the NH does.So it seems to make sense that average NH temperature would tend to be lower than average SH temperature.Also it would seem to make sense that the NH would be warming faster than the SH (because the oceans have greater thermal inertia than land).Both these things are true.So… what was the problem again?Can I now claim back all my carbon taxes as being mis-sold like PPI ?Folks,I notice that you are playing with the Icky #62 [-snip, let's keep away from the name-calling]. He is well known for constantly shooting himself in the foot, as well as making things up as he goes along, over on the Daily Telegraph.I’ll point you towards a classic quote of his over the last few days:“various analyses find that natural forcings over this period sum to around zero”
(this was after he was challenged on made up ‘smoke and mirrors’ analysis wrt. 1900-2010)have funbtw, acknowledge the snip mods, apologies; but maybe we are all too tolerant wrt. the name-calling of ‘denier’ (cf. holocaust denial), which the cAGW advocates constantly get away with.Yes csm, that’s what Meehl et al 2004 finds -http://images.sodahead.com/profiles/0/0/2/0/7/6/2/8/5/Meehl-with-labels-44587810031.jpeg
Combinations of Natural and Anthropogenic Forcings in Twentieth-Century Climate – Meehl et al 2004:  http://www.cawcr.gov.au/staff/jma/meehl_additivity.pdfIn the absence of anthropogenic warming we’d be roughly 0.8C cooler, back down to the global temperature of the early 20th Century.Icky, again, there you go again with the stuff that feeds garbage in, garbage out (GIGO) into IPCC GCM’s. I don’t know how you can possibly have the nerve to quote such material here and now in the present world, esp. in the wake of Climategate 2.0. Maybe you could have got away with such stuff five years ago.(i) There is an increasing divergence between climate sceance doomsayer predictions/projections in the real world, not least the lack of warming for the last decade plus (as much as ~15 years). Please don’t show me *tuned* 2007 models, because I am not interested, not with (i) their huge error bars that a bus can be driven through, and (ii) there having only been 4 years after the revised models were put forward via. AR4, and (iii) definitely not further to CG 2.0.(ii) The CG 2.0 e-mails demonstrate the severe self-doubts that the insiders had wrt. their models in private. It’s just a shame they did not share these concerns in public.—-JonesBasic problem is that all models are wrong – not got enough middle and low level clouds.
—-Barnett
[IPCC AR5 models]clearly, some tuning or very good luck involved. I doubt the modeling world will be able to get away with this much longer
———-Hegerl
[IPCC AR5 models]So using the 20th c for tuning is just doing what some people have long suspected us of doing [...] and what the nonpublished diagram from NCAR showing correlation between aerosol forcing and sensitivity also suggested.
———————… I particularly want to focus on the *tuning* aspect, which tended to be used rather than a proper understanding of *all* forcings.sheesh, come back to me when Trenberth et al. (the RealClimate crowd) have a proper understanding of basics such as albedo, as well as the potential for bi-directional feedback/forcing via. clouds. Also come back to me when you finally acknowledge the importance of multidecadal oscillations related to AMO/PDO, as even recently acknowledged by Muller (via. BEST, which was land-only, but that is for another day).————The 1930′s?I don’t know how to properly say thank you in German, but THANK YOU, Germany!!!!!![...] So it seems to me to be news if some large MSM outfit turns sceptical about AGW, as seems to have happened with Germany’s Bild (circulation 4 million), it’s real news: [...][...] http://notrickszone.com/2012/02/06/body-blow-to-german-global-warming-movement-major-media-outlets-u… [...][...] Germany’s Bild tells its million of readers:  THE CO2 LIE [...]Great that book is out and gets publicity?  But what’s new?  The IPPC in their own words have said from the beginning, and now, that the whole AGW hoohaa is a swindle, see my blogsite and especially the 04 OCT 2010 entry.Scientific proof will not make AGW go away.  This isn’t about raising taxes or wealth transfer, it’s about depopulation, so no matter what “proof” comes out that the science is wrong, the proposition will continue.  When you “plan” for global warming when actually you are entering global cooling, you will push to have farm land turned into “green sources of alternative energy,” and ban the use of carbon based fuels for energy.  The first starves off the poor and old, and the second will leave them without heat in the cold, freezing them to death, thus conveniently getting rid of all those “useless eaters” that some would prefer gone.Great that book is out and gets publicity!!!!!  and a big THANK YOU to the authors. But what’s new? The IPPC in their own words have said from the beginning, and now, that the whole AGW hoohaa is a swindle, see my blogsite and especially the 04 OCT 2010 entry.[I thought I better correct my earlier musings, with a question mark in the wrong place.  Haste make waste -;) ]The global population is far larger than the planet can sustainably support, but we don’t need to instigate deliberate and inhumane methods of depopulation, since if we just carry on as we are, nature will do that for us.  All the evidence says that we’re heading for a resource-depleted, overheated planet.  That’s bound to finish off a few billion people.You’re a sick person.No, just realistic.  Ever read ‘Limits to Growth’?You must be the last Leftist Malthusian in the wild still believing in that.
http://hauntingthelibrary.wordpress.com/2011/07/01/limits-to-growth-heres-what-you-never-hear-about-it-and-the-truth/Somebody should catch you before you go extinct so we can marvel at you in a zoo.And go find a copy of “All watched over By Machines Of Loving Grace” by Adam Curtis. Part 2 nicely demolishes the naive belief of the 70ies in simple cybernetic models. What demolished the models was, of course, what we later learned in Chaos Theory.So Dirk, you’re happy with the idea of infinite growth on a finite planet?Oy. Go read Julian Simon.
http://www.juliansimon.com/writings/Ultimate_Resource/Julian’s thesis seems to be “we always find something else”.  Sounds rather naive to me.Read it.For more good news:
http://www.gapminder.orgDirkHAssuming that it was these alleged 0.25 W/m ^2 that drove the planet in and out of glaciations is a leap of faith, as behind these numbers linger climate models, and we know how bad they are at getting anything right.No, it’s simple orbital mechanics.Furthermore, even if this number is true, it shows not the sensitivity towards a switch to a HotHouse Earth climate but the sensitivity to another glaciation. Assuming that these two risks are identical would be foolish, as there has not been a Hothouse Earth for many millions of years – so “HotHouse” looks much more unlikely than “Glaciation”.Finally an intelligent science-based comment, how refreshing.  Yes you’re right, we know more about the Earth going from current conditions into a glaciation than we do about the Earth going from current conditions to a warmer state, but that’s not necessarily reassuring, is it?  We don’t know that it’s “more unlikely” and there’s certainly no prospect of any cooling on the horizon, with all the greenhouse gases we’re pumping into the atmosphere.  The only real question is how hot it’s going to get and how soon.Oh lawdymine… have you ever wondered; WHY we enter glaciations regularly but not hothouse conditions? Do you know the Stefan-Boltzmann law; the fact that a body radiates proportional to the fourth power of its temperature; and how unlikely a rise of temperature therefore is; do you know ANYTHING about negative feedbacks? Have you understood Miskolczi’s theory?You have a lot to learn, I fear.Dirk, are you familiar with the climate history of the Earth?  Even hundreds of millions of years ago when the sun was substantially cooler, the Earth’s climate was often hotter than today.  The current ice age is due to the unusually low CO₂ level which has been declining for about 50 million years -http://images.sodahead.com/profiles/0/0/2/0/7/6/2/8/5/cenozoicfulljh-58586769462.jpegOn that basis we’re surely far more likely to see hothouse conditions than another glaciation, aren’t we?  We have a hotter sun and we have rapidly rising greenhouse gas levels, with no indication of any significant negative feedbacks (if there are substantial negative feedbacks then why weren’t they in evidence over the wild climate swings of the last couple of million years?).Icarus,
There are clouds:
http://www.agu.org/pubs/crossref/2012/2011GL050506.shtml
The sun cycles:
(article coming soon)
And Milankovich cycles:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milankovitch_cycles“Dirk, are you familiar with the climate history of the Earth? Even hundreds of millions of years ago when the sun was substantially cooler, the Earth’s climate was often hotter than today.”And the Earth’s atmosphere was much denser than today, and contained nearly no oxygen. The comparison doesn’t hold on multiple levels. Without oxygen, there can have been no water cycle as we know it today. There were no photosynthesizing organisms.Icarus, have you joined the climate bet for charity?
(Sidebar above.)“The AGW denial hoax is on its last legs.”Now if we can only get physics, chemistry, and the decadal temperature trends since the 1970s to agree, we’ll be home and dry. /sarcI’m with Icarus62 and most of the world’s serious scientists on this.  If you are not, you have a lot of explaining to do – a Der Bild or Daily Mail story is just not going to cut it.No; we don’t have any explaining to do. The people who forecast (predict, project, whatever) extraordinary things to happen have to.By now, their explanations for the current lack of warming are not convincing, and contradict their forecast from 10 years ago.Personally, I will just continue watching their failure. They can’t get out of this, as the advances in computer speed will not make meaningful models possible in the next 20 years. (Just to say a number)There is a different way out for long term forecasts; the one that Piers Corbyn is taking, but CO2 climate science has ruled out that way for themselves.[...] Source originale [...][...] But that’s not going to work, which brings me to the recent news item that I mentioned at the beginning. James Delingpole’s Daily Telegraph blog alerted me to the latest. In Germany, where the global warming dogma has been very deeply entrenched, one of the founding fathers of Germany’s environmentalist movement, Professor Fritz Vahrenholt, has converted into a global warming skeptic and is promoting his views in a new book and a series of article in Bild, a major German newspaper. What caused the change? According to one account: [...]Icarus,You’re at the wrong site now. You should be over athttp://tallbloke.wordpress.com/2012/02/09/nikolov-zeller-reply-eschenbach/#comment-17026How about a critique of Bishop Hill?http://www.thegwpf.org/images/stories/gwpf-reports/montford-royal_society.pdfNow that we know that ‘Global warming’ is a fraud, you may wish to know exactly why, without wasting time unnecessarily. Read 7 chapters to understand our atmosphere and the scientific frauds committed: http://www.seafriends.org.nz/issues/global/climate.htm.
Become an informed skeptic!Great! Thanks!
Global mean wind speed has increased by 30% over the past 150 years – leading to more evaporation and more transfer of heat to the atmosphere on the order of 50 W/m^2 according to this page:
http://www.seafriends.org.nz/issues/global/fletcher.htm[...] This blog suggests that the German media has a sudden rush of anti-catastrophe articles as a result of the book. [...][...] No Tricks Zone        “THE CO2 LIES … pure fear-mongering … should we blindly trust the experts?” [...][...]  [...]What I find most interesting about Dr. Fritz Vahrenholt’s argument is that it seems to have arisen because of one sloppily written report/research paper.  Just because one group of scientists gets overzealous and write a paper containing falsehoods doesn’t mean that the problem (AGW) doesn’t exist!!!  Re-read the article; this really seems to be his major bone of contention.
Just because there are some bad teachers out there doesn’t mean education is bad or full of lies.  Look at the entirety of the research that has been done by INDEPENDENT researchers and stop speculating without knowing all the facts.  The crap people write here is frightening; it is obvious they are just repeating little snippets of information they heard from God knows where without having any idea of the entire process.
The argument that we haven’t experienced periods of warming in the last x million years therefore we aren’t likely to experience it now is absolute nonsense.  The big difference between the last x million years and now is human beings pumping massive amounts of CO2 into the atmosphere!!How long until this book is translated into English? I’m in the U.S. (where we have to tolorate such as Al Gore) and want it NOW (if not sooner)!I wish I could answer that question. There’s a manuscript in English – I know because I’m the one who translated it. It’s now a question of finding a publisher.Well I sincerely HOPE a publisher is found soon. Good work! :o)[...] Last week, P. Gosselin reported: [...]“University of Osnabrück took the step of dis-inviting Professor Vahrenholt … The University claimed that Vahrenholt’s skeptical views were “provocative”.So now, western universities are “islands of repression in a sea of freedom”.  As the last bastions of marxism, they demonstrate an inevitable requirement by that unlovely toatlitarianism – all who diverge from the party line must be silenced so as not to disturb the student-bots’ programing.JC wrote:  “The big difference between the last x million years and now is human beings pumping massive amounts of CO2 into the atmosphere!!”Excitable (two exclamation points)  JC apparently doesn’t even know that there have been far higher levels of atmospheric CO2 on earth in previous pre-human millenia.  F for Fail.Icarus is reminiscent of Saddam Hussein’s TV spokesman who was still desperately insisting that there was no invasion in Iraq when you could see American soldiers in the background behind him.  Look over your shoulder, Icarus, at those inconvenient facts…The most inconvenient fact is that there is now no realistic chance of averting dangerous global warming.The outputs of climate models that don’t even get precipitation right are more realistic than reality for you?“The most inconvenient fact is that there is now no realistic chance of averting dangerous global warming.”
Right. Just tell that to anyone in Europe right now who is not cashing in on the scam, and see what response you get.Realclimate themselves can tell you how uncertain their model results are:
“However, the use of this comparison to refine estimates of climate sensitivity should be done cautiously, as the result is strongly dependent on the magnitude of the assumed forcing, which is itself uncertain. ”
http://www.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/2012/02/2011-updates-to-model-data-comparisons/#more-10475When the “assumed forcing” is “uncertain”, how come, Icarus, that you come to a conclusion of “no realistic chance”?`Obviously, the IPCC consensus climate scientists aren’t certain at all; also look at the enormous size of the 95% confidence interval in the graphs on the realclimate post – current stagnant temperatures fit easily into them.I think you want to mislead everyone about what the IPCC consensus climate scientists really say.The most inconvenient fact is that the junk science disguising the real goal of transfering wealth in a World Welfare program is being peeled off to reveal the red underneath for anyone with eyes to see.  Like Saddam Hussein’s spokesman Ali, Icarus will be among the last proclaiming their masters’ fallacies, unaware they’re wearing a clown suit.The AGW denial fraud is on its last legs.  Its days are numbered – I reckon about 1,300.  That’s how long it is until September 2015.Summer 2015 is when the Arctic Ocean is expected to become ice-free.  It could be a year or two earlier… or a year or two later… but the Arctic sea ice is doomed, and it’s not going to recover.http://images.sodahead.com/profiles/0/0/2/0/7/6/2/8/5/arcticicevoloct-59450867563.jpegThis is a massive and undeniable sign that the scientists were right, and the fossil fuel industry’s AGW deniers were simply deceiving the public in order to protect their employers’ profits for as long as possible.Earth with an ice-free Arctic is going to be a very different planet to the one we knew just a few decades ago.The deniers will be able to afford very good lawyers.  They’re going to need them.PIOMAS is a MODEL, Ikarus. What you’re looking at in that pretty picture is NOT the data. THIS is the data:
http://www.climate4you.com/images/NSIDC%20GlobalArcticAntarctic%20SeaIceArea.gifYes I’m familiar with that trick to hide the decline in Arctic sea ice.  It’s simply dishonest.DATA is dishonest and MODELs are honest? Geo-engineering peddlers are becoming desperate…You talk like it has already happened! It hasn’t. And it won’t. The coming cooling will reverse the trend.Only the kind of economic slowdown associated with an extreme depression could have any chance of avoiding 2°C of global warming by around 2040.  Even limiting the warming to 4°C would be difficult, and “a 4°C future is incompatible with an organized global community, is likely to be beyond ‘adaptation’, is devastating to the majority of ecosystems, and has a high probability of not being stable.” ( Kevin Anderson, a professor of energy and climate change who was, until recently, director of the U.K.’s leading climate research institution, the Tyndall Energy Program).  The part about “a high probability of not being stable” means that so many positive feedbacks will have kicked in by then, that further substantial warming will take place regardless of what we do. That spells disaster for global human civilisation and most other species.A Very Inconvenient Truth – Greene et alAh. We’re getting to the core of the matter. You’re a geo-engineering peddler, like Muller. Why didn’t you say that.Here’s a link for you. You’ll LOVE it.Technology to Re-Ice Artic to save Earth
http://technofrolic.blogspot.com/2009/09/location-near-greenland-cost-50-billion.htmlThe only geo-engineering I’d really like to see is removing the CO₂ we’ve put into the climate system, but that’s not realistically going to happen.  Where would we get the energy from?  We *acquired* energy in the process of creating that CO₂, by burning fossil fuels, so unless someone comes up with a miracle, a virtually free and unlimited source of energy out of thin air, there’s no way we can find enough energy to re-capture all that CO₂ – not on the timescale needed to avert disastrous global warming.James Lovelock suggests biochar as our last chance to remove a significant amount of CO₂ from the atmosphere and lock it away in the soil, but the entire biosphere only absorbs about one quarter of our emissions every year, so we can’t possibly grow enough biomass to offset carbon emissions.The only geo-engineering I’d really like to see is removing the CO₂ we’ve put into the climate system, but that’s not realistically going to happen.  Where would we get the energy from?  We *acquired* energy in the process of creating that CO₂, by burning fossil fuels, so unless someone comes up with a miracle, a virtually free and unlimited source of energy out of thin air, there’s no way we can find enough energy to re-capture all that CO₂ – not on the timescale needed to avert disastrous global warming.There’s no prospect of substantial cuts in emissions, and no way we can stop burning fossil fuels without crashing global civilisation.  In any case, no government is going to last long by telling its people they have to live hungry in the cold and the dark while other countries burn coal and oil like there’s no tomorrow.James Lovelock suggests biochar as our last chance to remove a significant amount of carbon from the atmosphere and lock it away in the soil,The entire biosphere only absorbs about one quarter of our emissions every year, so we can’t possibly grow enough biomass to offset carbon emissions.So we will continue to burn billions of tons of carbon, and global temperature will continue to rise.  The Arctic ice cap will be gone in summer within the decade – perhaps as early as 2015, just 3½ years away.  We will hit 2°C above pre-industrial temperature by about 2040 – perhaps earlier if the positive carbon cycle and ice albedo feedbacks are stronger and sooner than expected.  Recent research finds that the terrestrial carbon sink will fail by mid-century and the ocean sink by 2100 under a BAU scenario.  I think it’s too late to stop this now, even if we had the practical technology to substantially reduce carbon emissions, which we don’t.  We’ll soon reach a point where warming is out of our hands, regardless of what we do (if we haven’t reached that point already).Ever thought Al Gore could be cheating you?Like here:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=WK_WyvfcJygNot me.  I’m not familiar with anything Al Gore says – I read what the scientists say.“THE” scientists.The Korrekt scientists, of course.The ones that say that the Himalayan glaciers will be gone by 2035.Better prepare for a CO2-Global Warming-induced Ice Age, as predicted here. Note that this report is based on statements by the late Dr. Schneider, a leading Korrekt scientist:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zEQ79hE-Uo0Icarus,
Did you know that if you removed 100 ppm CO2 from the atmosphere, 100 million people in the rice growing regions of Asia would starve to death the next year? All crops would suffer. There would be world-wide famine.That’s clearly not true, since rice grew perfectly well at 280ppm for the last few thousand years, and we have only had substantially higher levels in the last few decades.  Yields have improved largely through breeding programmes, not because of elevated atmospheric CO₂.http://www.nature.com/scitable/knowledge/library/effects-of-rising-atmospheric-concentrations-of-carbon-13254108And:
http://www.uu.nl/faculty/science/EN/organisation/depts/biology/research/chairs/Palaeoecology/projects/AzollaProject/intranet/literature/AzollaandCO2/Documents/Kimball1983.pdfThe herd of dead horses Icarus keeps flogging are stinking to high heaven, especially the ridiculous claim that CO2 is driving (a non-existent) global warming, that man is responsible for high levels of CO2 and can control CO2 and climate.  If Icarus’s junk scientists COULD decrease levels of CO2 they would muck up Nature’s fertilizer and cause mass starvation.  Yet like a tireless jack-in-the box, Icarus keeps popping up with his inanities.  He’s like the loonies of old on street corners carrying signs proclaiming “The End is Near!” except he lurks on Internet sites instead.Read my books on the subject of global warming where I refuted Al Gore in books published between 2006 and 2008. I show a graph of the global temperature over the last 4500 years. Books published
Beyond Global Warming
Facts and Myths Facing Today’s World
Crises of The 21st Century.
They show what is really the things more important than controlling CO2 etc. Mainly focused on the lost of oil and its derivatives by 2037. No way to fly an airplane above 5000 feet economically. Liquid Natural Gas too heavy and inefficient for commercial flights.
John Durbin HusherSee the website; jdhbooks.com
displays covers of the books and a brief synopsis on each.
John Durbin HusherAll this wacky science to sell the Global Warming scam is laughable.  Here in Florida, citrus groves have been migrating southward for the past 100 years.  That alone is evidence of global cooling.  Al Gore and his merry band of leftist globaldroids are criminals and should be indicted and put on trial.[...] two years ago when he was asked to review an IPCC report on renewable energy. According to blogger P Gosselin  he was not impressed: “He found hundreds of errors. When he pointed them out, IPCC officials [...][...] two years ago when he was asked to review an IPCC report on renewable energy. According to blogger P Gosselin he was not impressed: “He found hundreds of errors. When he pointed them out, IPCC officials [...][…] appearing in flagship news magazines such as Spiegel and Bild, see here, here, here, and here, for example.   Read full article, […]